
Introduction
My Story

N THE FINAL day of my sophomore year of high school, I was hit in the face with a baseball bat. As my classmate took a full swing, the
bat slipped out of his hands and came flying toward me before striking me directly between the eyes. I have no memory of the moment of impact.
The bat smashed into my face with such force that it crushed my nose into a distorted U-shape. The collision sent the soft tissue of my brain slamming into the inside of my skull. Immediately, a wave of swelling surged throughout my head. In a fraction of a second, I had a broken nose, multiple skull fractures, and two shattered eye sockets.
When I opened my eyes, I saw people staring at me and running over to help. I looked down and noticed spots of red on my clothes. One of my classmates took the shirt off his back and handed it to me. I used it to plug the stream of blood rushing from my broken nose.
Shocked and confused, I was unaware of how seriously I had been injured.
My teacher looped his arm around my shoulder and we began the long walk to the nurse’s office: across the field, down the hill, and back into school. Random hands touched my sides, holding me upright. We took our time and walked slowly. Nobody realized that every minute mattered.
When we arrived at the nurse’s office, she asked me a series of questions.
“What year is it?”
“1998,” I answered. It was actually 2002. “Who is the president of the United States?”
“Bill Clinton,” I said. The correct answer was George W. Bush.
 
“What is your mom’s name?”
“Uh. Um.” I stalled. Ten seconds passed.
“Patti,” I said casually, ignoring the fact that it had taken me ten seconds to remember my own mother’s name.
That is the last question I remember. My body was unable to handle the rapid swelling in my brain and I lost consciousness before the ambulance arrived. Minutes later, I was carried out of school and taken to the local hospital.
Shortly after arriving, my body began shutting down. I struggled with basic functions like swallowing and breathing. I had my first seizure of the day. Then I stopped breathing entirely. As the doctors hurried to supply me with oxygen, they also decided the local hospital was unequipped to handle the situation and ordered a helicopter to fly me to a larger hospital in Cincinnati.
I was rolled out of the emergency room doors and toward the helipad across the street. The stretcher rattled on a bumpy sidewalk as one nurse pushed me along while another pumped each breath into me by hand. My mother, who had arrived at the hospital a few moments before, climbed into the helicopter beside me. I remained unconscious and unable to breathe on my own as she held my hand during the flight.
While my mother rode with me in the helicopter, my father went home to check on my brother and sister and break the news to them. He choked back tears as he explained to my sister that he would miss her eighth-grade graduation ceremony that night. After passing my siblings off to family and friends, he drove to Cincinnati to meet my mother.
When my mom and I landed on the roof of the hospital, a team of nearly twenty doctors and nurses sprinted onto the helipad and wheeled me into the trauma unit. By this time, the swelling in my brain had become so severe that I was having repeated post-traumatic seizures. My broken bones needed to be fixed, but I was in no condition to undergo surgery. After yet another seizure—my third of the day—I was put into a medically induced coma and placed on a ventilator.
My parents were no strangers to this hospital. Ten years earlier, they had entered the same building on the ground floor after my sister
 
was diagnosed with leukemia at age three. I was five at the time. My brother was just six months old. After two and a half years of chemotherapy treatments, spinal taps, and bone marrow biopsies, my little sister finally walked out of the hospital happy, healthy, and cancer free. And now, after ten years of normal life, my parents found themselves back in the same place with a different child.
While I slipped into a coma, the hospital sent a priest and a social worker to comfort my parents. It was the same priest who had met with them a decade earlier on the evening they found out my sister had cancer.
As day faded into night, a series of machines kept me alive. My parents slept restlessly on a hospital mattress—one moment they would collapse from fatigue, the next they would be wide awake with worry. My mother would tell me later, “It was one of the worst nights I’ve ever had.”

MY RECOVERY
Mercifully, by the next morning my breathing had rebounded to the point where the doctors felt comfortable releasing me from the coma. When I finally regained consciousness, I discovered that I had lost my ability to smell. As a test, a nurse asked me to blow my nose and sniff an apple juice box. My sense of smell returned, but—to everyone’s surprise—the act of blowing my nose forced air through the fractures in my eye socket and pushed my left eye outward. My eyeball bulged out of the socket, held precariously in place by my eyelid and the optic nerve attaching my eye to my brain.
The ophthalmologist said my eye would gradually slide back into place as the air seeped out, but it was hard to tell how long this would take. I was scheduled for surgery one week later, which would allow me some additional time to heal. I looked like I had been on the wrong end of a boxing match, but I was cleared to leave the hospital. I returned home with a broken nose, half a dozen facial fractures, and a bulging left eye.
The following months were hard. It felt like everything in my life was on pause. I had double vision for weeks; I literally couldn’t see straight. It took more than a month, but my eyeball did eventually return to its normal location. Between the seizures and my vision
 
problems, it was eight months before I could drive a car again. At physical therapy, I practiced basic motor patterns like walking in a straight line. I was determined not to let my injury get me down, but there were more than a few moments when I felt depressed and overwhelmed.
I became painfully aware of how far I had to go when I returned to the baseball field one year later. Baseball had always been a major part of my life. My dad had played minor league baseball for the St. Louis Cardinals, and I had a dream of playing professionally, too. After months of rehabilitation, what I wanted more than anything was to get back on the field.
But my return to baseball was not smooth. When the season rolled around, I was the only junior to be cut from the varsity baseball team. I was sent down to play with the sophomores on junior varsity. I had been playing since age four, and for someone who had spent so much time and effort on the sport, getting cut was humiliating. I vividly remember the day it happened. I sat in my car and cried as I flipped through the radio, desperately searching for a song that would make me feel better.
After a year of self-doubt, I managed to make the varsity team as a senior, but I rarely made it on the field. In total, I played eleven innings of high school varsity baseball, barely more than a single game.
Despite my lackluster high school career, I still believed I could become a great player. And I knew that if things were going to improve, I was the one responsible for making it happen. The turning point came two years after my injury, when I began college at Denison University. It was a new beginning, and it was the place where I would discover the surprising power of small habits for the first time.

HOW I LEARNED ABOUT HABITS
Attending Denison was one of the best decisions of my life. I earned a spot on the baseball team and, although I was at the bottom of the roster as a freshman, I was thrilled. Despite the chaos of my high school years, I had managed to become a college athlete.
I wasn’t going to be starting on the baseball team anytime soon, so I focused on getting my life in order. While my peers stayed up late and
 
played video games, I built good sleep habits and went to bed early each night. In the messy world of a college dorm, I made a point to keep my room neat and tidy. These improvements were minor, but they gave me a sense of control over my life. I started to feel confident again. And this growing belief in myself rippled into the classroom as I improved my study habits and managed to earn straight A’s during my first year.
A habit is a routine or behavior that is performed regularly—and, in many cases, automatically. As each semester passed, I accumulated small but consistent habits that ultimately led to results that were unimaginable to me when I started. For example, for the first time in my life, I made it a habit to lift weights multiple times per week, and in the years that followed, my six-foot-four-inch frame bulked up from a featherweight 170 to a lean 200 pounds.
When my sophomore season arrived, I earned a starting role on the pitching staff. By my junior year, I was voted team captain and at the end of the season, I was selected for the all-conference team. But it was not until my senior season that my sleep habits, study habits, and strength-training habits really began to pay off.
Six years after I had been hit in the face with a baseball bat, flown to the hospital, and placed into a coma, I was selected as the top male athlete at Denison University and named to the ESPN Academic All- America Team—an honor given to just thirty-three players across the country. By the time I graduated, I was listed in the school record books in eight different categories. That same year, I was awarded the university’s highest academic honor, the President’s Medal.
I hope you’ll forgive me if this sounds boastful. To be honest, there was nothing legendary or historic about my athletic career. I never ended up playing professionally. However, looking back on those years, I believe I accomplished something just as rare: I fulfilled my potential. And I believe the concepts in this book can help you fulfill your potential as well.
We all face challenges in life. This injury was one of mine, and the experience taught me a critical lesson: changes that seem small and unimportant at first will compound into remarkable results if you’re willing to stick with them for years. We all deal with setbacks but in the long run, the quality of our lives often depends on the quality of our
 
habits. With the same habits, you’ll end up with the same results. But with better habits, anything is possible.
Maybe there are people who can achieve incredible success overnight. I don’t know any of them, and I’m certainly not one of them. There wasn’t one defining moment on my journey from medically induced coma to Academic All-American; there were many. It was a gradual evolution, a long series of small wins and tiny breakthroughs. The only way I made progress—the only choice I had—was to start small. And I employed this same strategy a few years later when I started my own business and began working on this book.

HOW AND WHY I WROTE THIS BOOK
In November 2012, I began publishing articles at jamesclear.com. For years, I had been keeping notes about my personal experiments with habits and I was finally ready to share some of them publicly. I began by publishing a new article every Monday and Thursday. Within a few months, this simple writing habit led to my first one thousand email subscribers, and by the end of 2013 that number had grown to more than thirty thousand people.
In 2014, my email list expanded to over one hundred thousand subscribers, which made it one of the fastest-growing newsletters on the internet. I had felt like an impostor when I began writing two years earlier, but now I was becoming known as an expert on habits—a new label that excited me but also felt uncomfortable. I had never considered myself a master of the topic, but rather someone who was experimenting alongside my readers.
In 2015, I reached two hundred thousand email subscribers and signed a book deal with Penguin Random House to begin writing the book you are reading now. As my audience grew, so did my business opportunities. I was increasingly asked to speak at top companies about the science of habit formation, behavior change, and continuous improvement. I found myself delivering keynote speeches at conferences in the United States and Europe.
In 2016, my articles began to appear regularly in major publications like Time, Entrepreneur, and Forbes. Incredibly, my writing was read by over eight million people that year. Coaches in the NFL, NBA, and MLB began reading my work and sharing it with their teams.
 
At the start of 2017, I launched the Habits Academy, which became the premier training platform for organizations and individuals interested in building better habits in life and work.* Fortune 500 companies and growing start-ups began to enroll their leaders and train their staff. In total, over ten thousand leaders, managers, coaches, and teachers have graduated from the Habits Academy, and my work with them has taught me an incredible amount about what it takes to make habits work in the real world.
As I put the finishing touches on this book in 2018, jamesclear.com is receiving millions of visitors per month and nearly five hundred thousand people subscribe to my weekly email newsletter—a number that is so far beyond my expectations when I began that I’m not even sure what to think of it.

HOW THIS BOOK WILL BENEFIT YOU
The entrepreneur and investor Naval Ravikant has said, “To write a great book, you must first become the book.” I originally learned about the ideas mentioned here because I had to live them. I had to rely on small habits to rebound from my injury, to get stronger in the gym, to perform at a high level on the field, to become a writer, to build a successful business, and simply to develop into a responsible adult.
Small habits helped me fulfill my potential, and since you picked up this book, I’m guessing you’d like to fulfill yours as well.
In the pages that follow, I will share a step-by-step plan for building better habits—not for days or weeks, but for a lifetime. While science supports everything I’ve written, this book is not an academic research paper; it’s an operating manual. You’ll find wisdom and practical advice front and center as I explain the science of how to create and change your habits in a way that is easy to understand and apply.
The fields I draw on—biology, neuroscience, philosophy, psychology, and more—have been around for many years. What I offer you is a synthesis of the best ideas smart people figured out a long time ago as well as the most compelling discoveries scientists have made recently. My contribution, I hope, is to find the ideas that matter most and connect them in a way that is highly actionable. Anything wise in these pages you should credit to the many experts who preceded me.
Anything foolish, assume it is my error.
 
The backbone of this book is my four-step model of habits—cue, craving, response, and reward—and the four laws of behavior change that evolve out of these steps. Readers with a psychology background may recognize some of these terms from operant conditioning, which was first proposed as “stimulus, response, reward” by B. F. Skinner in the 1930s and has been popularized more recently as “cue, routine, reward” in The Power of Habit by Charles Duhigg.
Behavioral scientists like Skinner realized that if you offered the right reward or punishment, you could get people to act in a certain way. But while Skinner’s model did an excellent job of explaining how external stimuli influenced our habits, it lacked a good explanation for how our thoughts, feelings, and beliefs impact our behavior. Internal states—our moods and emotions—matter, too. In recent decades, scientists have begun to determine the connection between our thoughts, feelings, and behavior. This research will also be covered in these pages.
In total, the framework I offer is an integrated model of the cognitive and behavioral sciences. I believe it is one of the first models of human behavior to accurately account for both the influence of external stimuli and internal emotions on our habits. While some of the language may be familiar, I am confident that the details—and the applications of the Four Laws of Behavior Change—will offer a new way to think about your habits.
Human behavior is always changing: situation to situation, moment to moment, second to second. But this book is about what doesn’t change. It’s about the fundamentals of human behavior. The lasting principles you can rely on year after year. The ideas you can build a business around, build a family around, build a life around.
There is no one right way to create better habits, but this book describes the best way I know—an approach that will be effective regardless of where you start or what you’re trying to change. The strategies I cover will be relevant to anyone looking for a step-by-step system for improvement, whether your goals center on health, money, productivity, relationships, or all of the above. As long as human behavior is involved, this book will be your guide.
 

The Surprising Power of Atomic Habits
HE FATE OF British Cycling changed one day in 2003. The organization, which was the governing body for professional
cycling in Great Britain, had recently hired Dave Brailsford as its new performance director. At the time, professional cyclists in Great Britain had endured nearly one hundred years of mediocrity. Since 1908, British riders had won just a single gold medal at the Olympic Games, and they had fared even worse in cycling’s biggest race, the Tour de France. In 110 years, no British cyclist had ever won the event.
In fact, the performance of British riders had been so underwhelming that one of the top bike manufacturers in Europe refused to sell bikes to the team because they were afraid that it would hurt sales if other professionals saw the Brits using their gear.
Brailsford had been hired to put British Cycling on a new trajectory.
What made him different from previous coaches was his relentless commitment to a strategy that he referred to as “the aggregation of marginal gains,” which was the philosophy of searching for a tiny margin of improvement in everything you do. Brailsford said, “The whole principle came from the idea that if you broke down everything you could think of that goes into riding a bike, and then improve it by 1 percent, you will get a significant increase when you put them all together.”
Brailsford and his coaches began by making small adjustments you might expect from a professional cycling team. They redesigned the bike seats to make them more comfortable and rubbed alcohol on the tires for a better grip. They asked riders to wear electrically heated overshorts to maintain ideal muscle temperature while riding and used
 
biofeedback sensors to monitor how each athlete responded to a particular workout. The team tested various fabrics in a wind tunnel and had their outdoor riders switch to indoor racing suits, which proved to be lighter and more aerodynamic.
But they didn’t stop there. Brailsford and his team continued to find 1 percent improvements in overlooked and unexpected areas. They tested different types of massage gels to see which one led to the fastest muscle recovery. They hired a surgeon to teach each rider the best way to wash their hands to reduce the chances of catching a cold. They determined the type of pillow and mattress that led to the best night’s sleep for each rider. They even painted the inside of the team truck white, which helped them spot little bits of dust that would normally slip by unnoticed but could degrade the performance of the finely tuned bikes.
As these and hundreds of other small improvements accumulated, the results came faster than anyone could have imagined.
Just five years after Brailsford took over, the British Cycling team dominated the road and track cycling events at the 2008 Olympic Games in Beijing, where they won an astounding 60 percent of the gold medals available. Four years later, when the Olympic Games came to London, the Brits raised the bar as they set nine Olympic records and seven world records.
That same year, Bradley Wiggins became the first British cyclist to win the Tour de France. The next year, his teammate Chris Froome won the race, and he would go on to win again in 2015, 2016, and 2017, giving the British team five Tour de France victories in six years.
During the ten-year span from 2007 to 2017, British cyclists won 178 world championships and sixty-six Olympic or Paralympic gold medals and captured five Tour de France victories in what is widely regarded as the most successful run in cycling history.*
How does this happen? How does a team of previously ordinary athletes transform into world champions with tiny changes that, at first glance, would seem to make a modest difference at best? Why do small improvements accumulate into such remarkable results, and how can you replicate this approach in your own life?

WHY SMALL HABITS MAKE A BIG DIFFERENCE
 
It is so easy to overestimate the importance of one defining moment and underestimate the value of making small improvements on a daily basis. Too often, we convince ourselves that massive success requires massive action. Whether it is losing weight, building a business, writing a book, winning a championship, or achieving any other goal, we put pressure on ourselves to make some earth-shattering improvement that everyone will talk about.
Meanwhile, improving by 1 percent isn’t particularly notable— sometimes it isn’t even noticeable—but it can be far more meaningful, especially in the long run. The difference a tiny improvement can make over time is astounding. Here’s how the math works out: if you can get 1 percent better each day for one year, you’ll end up thirty-seven times better by the time you’re done. Conversely, if you get 1 percent worse each day for one year, you’ll decline nearly down to zero. What starts as a small win or a minor setback accumulates into something much more.

1% BETTER EVERY DAY
1% worse every day for one year. 0.99365 = 00.03 1% better every day for one year. 1.01365 = 37.78
 

FIGURE 1: The effects of small habits compound over time. For example, if you can get just 1 percent better each day, you’ll end up with results that are nearly 37 times better after one year.

Habits are the compound interest of self-improvement. The same way that money multiplies through compound interest, the effects of your habits multiply as you repeat them. They seem to make little difference on any given day and yet the impact they deliver over the months and years can be enormous. It is only when looking back two, five, or perhaps ten years later that the value of good habits and the cost of bad ones becomes strikingly apparent.
This can be a difficult concept to appreciate in daily life. We often dismiss small changes because they don’t seem to matter very much in the moment. If you save a little money now, you’re still not a millionaire. If you go to the gym three days in a row, you’re still out of shape. If you study Mandarin for an hour tonight, you still haven’t learned the language. We make a few changes, but the results never seem to come quickly and so we slide back into our previous routines.
Unfortunately, the slow pace of transformation also makes it easy to let a bad habit slide. If you eat an unhealthy meal today, the scale doesn’t move much. If you work late tonight and ignore your family,
 
they will forgive you. If you procrastinate and put your project off until tomorrow, there will usually be time to finish it later. A single decision is easy to dismiss.
But when we repeat 1 percent errors, day after day, by replicating poor decisions, duplicating tiny mistakes, and rationalizing little excuses, our small choices compound into toxic results. It’s the accumulation of many missteps—a 1 percent decline here and there— that eventually leads to a problem.
The impact created by a change in your habits is similar to the effect of shifting the route of an airplane by just a few degrees. Imagine you are flying from Los Angeles to New York City. If a pilot leaving from LAX adjusts the heading just 3.5 degrees south, you will land in Washington, D.C., instead of New York. Such a small change is barely noticeable at takeoff—the nose of the airplane moves just a few feet— but when magnified across the entire United States, you end up hundreds of miles apart.*
Similarly, a slight change in your daily habits can guide your life to a very different destination. Making a choice that is 1 percent better or 1 percent worse seems insignificant in the moment, but over the span of moments that make up a lifetime these choices determine the difference between who you are and who you could be. Success is the product of daily habits—not once-in-a-lifetime transformations.
That said, it doesn’t matter how successful or unsuccessful you are right now. What matters is whether your habits are putting you on the path toward success. You should be far more concerned with your current trajectory than with your current results. If you’re a millionaire but you spend more than you earn each month, then you’re on a bad trajectory. If your spending habits don’t change, it’s not going to end well. Conversely, if you’re broke, but you save a little bit every month, then you’re on the path toward financial freedom—even if you’re moving slower than you’d like.
Your outcomes are a lagging measure of your habits. Your net worth is a lagging measure of your financial habits. Your weight is a lagging measure of your eating habits. Your knowledge is a lagging measure of your learning habits. Your clutter is a lagging measure of your cleaning habits. You get what you repeat.
 
If you want to predict where you’ll end up in life, all you have to do is follow the curve of tiny gains or tiny losses, and see how your daily choices will compound ten or twenty years down the line. Are you spending less than you earn each month? Are you making it into the gym each week? Are you reading books and learning something new each day? Tiny battles like these are the ones that will define your future self.
Time magnifies the margin between success and failure. It will multiply whatever you feed it. Good habits make time your ally. Bad habits make time your enemy.
Habits are a double-edged sword. Bad habits can cut you down just as easily as good habits can build you up, which is why understanding the details is crucial. You need to know how habits work and how to design them to your liking, so you can avoid the dangerous half of the blade.
YOUR HABITS CAN COMPOUND FOR YOU OR AGAINST YOU


Positive Compounding
Productivity compounds. Accomplishing one extra task is a small feat on any given day, but it counts for a lot over an entire career. The effect of automating an old task or mastering a new skill can be even greater. The more tasks you can handle without thinking, the more your brain is free to focus on other areas.
Knowledge compounds. Learning one new idea won’t make you a genius, but a commitment to lifelong learning can be transformative. Furthermore, each book you read not only teaches you something new but also opens up different ways of thinking about old ideas. As Warren Buffett says, “That’s how knowledge works. It builds up, like compound interest.”
Relationships compound. People reflect your behavior back to you. The more you help others, the more others want to help you. Being a little bit nicer in each interaction can result in a network of broad and strong connections over time.
Negative Compounding
Stress compounds. The frustration of a traffic jam. The weight of parenting responsibilities. The worry of making ends meet. The strain of slightly high blood pressure. By themselves, these common causes of stress are manageable. But when they persist for years, little stresses compound into serious health issues.
Negative thoughts compound. The more you think of yourself as worthless, stupid, or ugly, the more you condition yourself to interpret life that way. You get trapped in a thought loop.
The same is true for how you think about others. Once you fall into the habit of seeing people as angry, unjust, or selfish, you see those kind of people everywhere.
Outrage compounds. Riots, protests, and mass movements are rarely the result of a single event. Instead, a long series of microaggressions and daily aggravations slowly multiply until one event tips the scales and outrage spreads like wildfire.
 
WHAT PROGRESS IS REALLY LIKE
Imagine that you have an ice cube sitting on the table in front of you. The room is cold and you can see your breath. It is currently twenty- five degrees. Ever so slowly, the room begins to heat up.
Twenty-six degrees. Twenty-seven.
Twenty-eight.
The ice cube is still sitting on the table in front of you. Twenty-nine degrees.
Thirty. Thirty-one.
Still, nothing has happened.
Then, thirty-two degrees. The ice begins to melt. A one-degree shift, seemingly no different from the temperature increases before it, has unlocked a huge change.
Breakthrough moments are often the result of many previous actions, which build up the potential required to unleash a major change. This pattern shows up everywhere. Cancer spends 80 percent of its life undetectable, then takes over the body in months. Bamboo can barely be seen for the first five years as it builds extensive root systems underground before exploding ninety feet into the air within six weeks.
Similarly, habits often appear to make no difference until you cross a critical threshold and unlock a new level of performance. In the early and middle stages of any quest, there is often a Valley of Disappointment. You expect to make progress in a linear fashion and it’s frustrating how ineffective changes can seem during the first days, weeks, and even months. It doesn’t feel like you are going anywhere.
It’s a hallmark of any compounding process: the most powerful outcomes are delayed.
This is one of the core reasons why it is so hard to build habits that last. People make a few small changes, fail to see a tangible result, and decide to stop. You think, “I’ve been running every day for a month, so why can’t I see any change in my body?” Once this kind of thinking
 
takes over, it’s easy to let good habits fall by the wayside. But in order to make a meaningful difference, habits need to persist long enough to break through this plateau—what I call the Plateau of Latent Potential.
If you find yourself struggling to build a good habit or break a bad one, it is not because you have lost your ability to improve. It is often because you have not yet crossed the Plateau of Latent Potential.
Complaining about not achieving success despite working hard is like complaining about an ice cube not melting when you heated it from twenty-five to thirty-one degrees. Your work was not wasted; it is just being stored. All the action happens at thirty-two degrees.
When you finally break through the Plateau of Latent Potential, people will call it an overnight success. The outside world only sees the most dramatic event rather than all that preceded it. But you know that it’s the work you did long ago—when it seemed that you weren’t making any progress—that makes the jump today possible.
It is the human equivalent of geological pressure. Two tectonic plates can grind against one another for millions of years, the tension slowly building all the while. Then, one day, they rub each other once again, in the same fashion they have for ages, but this time the tension is too great. An earthquake erupts. Change can take years—before it happens all at once.
Mastery requires patience. The San Antonio Spurs, one of the most successful teams in NBA history, have a quote from social reformer Jacob Riis hanging in their locker room: “When nothing seems to help, I go and look at a stonecutter hammering away at his rock, perhaps a hundred times without as much as a crack showing in it. Yet at the hundred and first blow it will split in two, and I know it was not that last blow that did it—but all that had gone before.”

THE PLATEAU OF LATENT POTENTIAL
 

FIGURE 2: We often expect progress to be linear. At the very least, we hope it will come quickly. In reality, the results of our efforts are often delayed. It is not until months or years later that we realize the true value of the previous work we have done. This can result in a “valley of disappointment” where people feel discouraged after putting in weeks or months of hard work without experiencing any results. However, this work was not wasted. It was simply being stored. It is not until much later that the full value of previous efforts is revealed.

All big things come from small beginnings. The seed of every habit is a single, tiny decision. But as that decision is repeated, a habit sprouts and grows stronger. Roots entrench themselves and branches grow. The task of breaking a bad habit is like uprooting a powerful oak within us. And the task of building a good habit is like cultivating a delicate flower one day at a time.
But what determines whether we stick with a habit long enough to survive the Plateau of Latent Potential and break through to the other side? What is it that causes some people to slide into unwanted habits and enables others to enjoy the compounding effects of good ones?

FORGET ABOUT GOALS, FOCUS ON SYSTEMS INSTEAD
Prevailing wisdom claims that the best way to achieve what we want in life—getting into better shape, building a successful business, relaxing more and worrying less, spending more time with friends and family— is to set specific, actionable goals.
 
For many years, this was how I approached my habits, too. Each one was a goal to be reached. I set goals for the grades I wanted to get in school, for the weights I wanted to lift in the gym, for the profits I wanted to earn in business. I succeeded at a few, but I failed at a lot of them. Eventually, I began to realize that my results had very little to do with the goals I set and nearly everything to do with the systems I followed.
What’s the difference between systems and goals? It’s a distinction I first learned from Scott Adams, the cartoonist behind the Dilbert comic. Goals are about the results you want to achieve. Systems are about the processes that lead to those results.

  If you’re a coach, your goal might be to win a championship. Your system is the way you recruit players, manage your assistant coaches, and conduct practice.
  If you’re an entrepreneur, your goal might be to build a million- dollar business. Your system is how you test product ideas, hire employees, and run marketing campaigns.
  If you’re a musician, your goal might be to play a new piece. Your system is how often you practice, how you break down and tackle difficult measures, and your method for receiving feedback from your instructor.

Now for the interesting question: If you completely ignored your goals and focused only on your system, would you still succeed? For example, if you were a basketball coach and you ignored your goal to win a championship and focused only on what your team does at practice each day, would you still get results?
I think you would.
The goal in any sport is to finish with the best score, but it would be ridiculous to spend the whole game staring at the scoreboard. The only way to actually win is to get better each day. In the words of three-time Super Bowl winner Bill Walsh, “The score takes care of itself.” The same is true for other areas of life. If you want better results, then forget about setting goals. Focus on your system instead.
What do I mean by this? Are goals completely useless? Of course not. Goals are good for setting a direction, but systems are best for
 
making progress. A handful of problems arise when you spend too much time thinking about your goals and not enough time designing your systems.

Problem #1: Winners and losers have the same goals.
Goal setting suffers from a serious case of survivorship bias. We concentrate on the people who end up winning—the survivors—and mistakenly assume that ambitious goals led to their success while overlooking all of the people who had the same objective but didn’t succeed.
Every Olympian wants to win a gold medal. Every candidate wants to get the job. And if successful and unsuccessful people share the same goals, then the goal cannot be what differentiates the winners from the losers. It wasn’t the goal of winning the Tour de France that propelled the British cyclists to the top of the sport. Presumably, they had wanted to win the race every year before—just like every other professional team. The goal had always been there. It was only when they implemented a system of continuous small improvements that they achieved a different outcome.

Problem #2: Achieving a goal is only a momentary change.
Imagine you have a messy room and you set a goal to clean it. If you summon the energy to tidy up, then you will have a clean room—for now. But if you maintain the same sloppy, pack-rat habits that led to a messy room in the first place, soon you’ll be looking at a new pile of clutter and hoping for another burst of motivation. You’re left chasing the same outcome because you never changed the system behind it.
You treated a symptom without addressing the cause.
Achieving a goal only changes your life for the moment. That’s the counterintuitive thing about improvement. We think we need to change our results, but the results are not the problem. What we really need to change are the systems that cause those results. When you solve problems at the results level, you only solve them temporarily. In order to improve for good, you need to solve problems at the systems level. Fix the inputs and the outputs will fix themselves.
 
Problem #3: Goals restrict your happiness.
The implicit assumption behind any goal is this: “Once I reach my goal, then I’ll be happy.” The problem with a goals-first mentality is that you’re continually putting happiness off until the next milestone. I’ve slipped into this trap so many times I’ve lost count. For years, happiness was always something for my future self to enjoy. I promised myself that once I gained twenty pounds of muscle or after my business was featured in the New York Times, then I could finally relax.
Furthermore, goals create an “either-or” conflict: either you achieve your goal and are successful or you fail and you are a disappointment. You mentally box yourself into a narrow version of happiness. This is misguided. It is unlikely that your actual path through life will match the exact journey you had in mind when you set out. It makes no sense to restrict your satisfaction to one scenario when there are many paths to success.
A systems-first mentality provides the antidote. When you fall in love with the process rather than the product, you don’t have to wait to give yourself permission to be happy. You can be satisfied anytime your system is running. And a system can be successful in many different forms, not just the one you first envision.

Problem #4: Goals are at odds with long-term progress.
Finally, a goal-oriented mind-set can create a “yo-yo” effect. Many runners work hard for months, but as soon as they cross the finish line, they stop training. The race is no longer there to motivate them. When all of your hard work is focused on a particular goal, what is left to push you forward after you achieve it? This is why many people find themselves reverting to their old habits after accomplishing a goal.
The purpose of setting goals is to win the game. The purpose of building systems is to continue playing the game. True long-term thinking is goal-less thinking. It’s not about any single accomplishment. It is about the cycle of endless refinement and continuous improvement. Ultimately, it is your commitment to the process that will determine your progress.
 
A SYSTEM OF ATOMIC HABITS
If you’re having trouble changing your habits, the problem isn’t you. The problem is your system. Bad habits repeat themselves again and again not because you don’t want to change, but because you have the wrong system for change.
You do not rise to the level of your goals. You fall to the level of your systems.
Focusing on the overall system, rather than a single goal, is one of the core themes of this book. It is also one of the deeper meanings behind the word atomic. By now, you’ve probably realized that an atomic habit refers to a tiny change, a marginal gain, a 1 percent improvement. But atomic habits are not just any old habits, however small. They are little habits that are part of a larger system. Just as atoms are the building blocks of molecules, atomic habits are the building blocks of remarkable results.
Habits are like the atoms of our lives. Each one is a fundamental unit that contributes to your overall improvement. At first, these tiny routines seem insignificant, but soon they build on each other and fuel bigger wins that multiply to a degree that far outweighs the cost of their initial investment. They are both small and mighty. This is the meaning of the phrase atomic habits—a regular practice or routine that is not only small and easy to do, but also the source of incredible power; a component of the system of compound growth.

Chapter Summary
  Habits are the compound interest of self-improvement. Getting 1 percent better every day counts for a lot in the long-run.
  Habits are a double-edged sword. They can work for you or against you, which is why understanding the details is essential.
  Small changes often appear to make no difference until you cross a critical threshold. The most powerful outcomes of any compounding process are delayed. You need to be patient.
  An atomic habit is a little habit that is part of a larger system. Just as atoms are the building blocks of molecules, atomic habits are the building blocks of remarkable results.
 
If you want better results, then forget about setting goals. Focus on your system instead.
You do not rise to the level of your goals. You fall to the level of your systems.
 

2
How Your Habits Shape Your Identity (and Vice Versa)
HY IS IT so easy to repeat bad habits and so hard to form good ones? Few things can have a more powerful impact on your life
than improving your daily habits. And yet it is likely that this time next year you’ll be doing the same thing rather than something better.
It often feels difficult to keep good habits going for more than a few days, even with sincere effort and the occasional burst of motivation. Habits like exercise, meditation, journaling, and cooking are reasonable for a day or two and then become a hassle.
However, once your habits are established, they seem to stick around forever—especially the unwanted ones. Despite our best intentions, unhealthy habits like eating junk food, watching too much television, procrastinating, and smoking can feel impossible to break.
Changing our habits is challenging for two reasons: (1) we try to change the wrong thing and (2) we try to change our habits in the wrong way. In this chapter, I’ll address the first point. In the chapters that follow, I’ll answer the second.
Our first mistake is that we try to change the wrong thing. To understand what I mean, consider that there are three levels at which change can occur. You can imagine them like the layers of an onion.

THREE LAYERS OF BEHAVIOR CHANGE
 


FIGURE 3: There are three layers of behavior change: a change in your outcomes, a change in your processes, or a change in your identity.

The first layer is changing your outcomes. This level is concerned with changing your results: losing weight, publishing a book, winning a championship. Most of the goals you set are associated with this level of change.
The second layer is changing your process. This level is concerned with changing your habits and systems: implementing a new routine at the gym, decluttering your desk for better workflow, developing a meditation practice. Most of the habits you build are associated with this level.
The third and deepest layer is changing your identity. This level is concerned with changing your beliefs: your worldview, your self-image, your judgments about yourself and others. Most of the beliefs, assumptions, and biases you hold are associated with this level.
Outcomes are about what you get. Processes are about what you do.
Identity is about what you believe. When it comes to building habits that last—when it comes to building a system of 1 percent improvements—the problem is not that one level is “better” or “worse” than another. All levels of change are useful in their own way. The problem is the direction of change.
Many people begin the process of changing their habits by focusing on what they want to achieve. This leads us to outcome-based habits. The alternative is to build identity-based habits. With this approach, we start by focusing on who we wish to become.
 
OUTCOME-BASED HABITS
IDENTITY-BASED HABITS
FIGURE 4: With outcome-based habits, the focus is on what you want to achieve. With identity-based habits, the focus is on who you wish to become.

Imagine two people resisting a cigarette. When offered a smoke, the first person says, “No thanks. I’m trying to quit.” It sounds like a reasonable response, but this person still believes they are a smoker who is trying to be something else. They are hoping their behavior will change while carrying around the same beliefs.
The second person declines by saying, “No thanks. I’m not a smoker.” It’s a small difference, but this statement signals a shift in identity. Smoking was part of their former life, not their current one. They no longer identify as someone who smokes.
Most people don’t even consider identity change when they set out to improve. They just think, “I want to be skinny (outcome) and if I stick to this diet, then I’ll be skinny (process).” They set goals and determine the actions they should take to achieve those goals without considering the beliefs that drive their actions. They never shift the
 
way they look at themselves, and they don’t realize that their old identity can sabotage their new plans for change.
Behind every system of actions are a system of beliefs. The system of a democracy is founded on beliefs like freedom, majority rule, and social equality. The system of a dictatorship has a very different set of beliefs like absolute authority and strict obedience. You can imagine many ways to try to get more people to vote in a democracy, but such behavior change would never get off the ground in a dictatorship.
That’s not the identity of the system. Voting is a behavior that is impossible under a certain set of beliefs.
A similar pattern exists whether we are discussing individuals, organizations, or societies. There are a set of beliefs and assumptions that shape the system, an identity behind the habits.
Behavior that is incongruent with the self will not last. You may want more money, but if your identity is someone who consumes rather than creates, then you’ll continue to be pulled toward spending rather than earning. You may want better health, but if you continue to prioritize comfort over accomplishment, you’ll be drawn to relaxing rather than training. It’s hard to change your habits if you never change the underlying beliefs that led to your past behavior. You have a new goal and a new plan, but you haven’t changed who you are.
The story of Brian Clark, an entrepreneur from Boulder, Colorado, provides a good example. “For as long as I can remember, I’ve chewed my fingernails,” Clark told me. “It started as a nervous habit when I was young, and then morphed into an undesirable grooming ritual.
One day, I resolved to stop chewing my nails until they grew out a bit. Through mindful willpower alone, I managed to do it.”
Then, Clark did something surprising.
“I asked my wife to schedule my first-ever manicure,” he said. “My thought was that if I started paying to maintain my nails, I wouldn’t chew them. And it worked, but not for the monetary reason. What happened was the manicure made my fingers look really nice for the first time. The manicurist even said that—other than the chewing—I had really healthy, attractive nails. Suddenly, I was proud of my fingernails. And even though that’s something I had never aspired to, it made all the difference. I’ve never chewed my nails since; not even a
 
single close call. And it’s because I now take pride in properly caring for them.”
The ultimate form of intrinsic motivation is when a habit becomes part of your identity. It’s one thing to say I’m the type of person who wants this. It’s something very different to say I’m the type of person who is this.
The more pride you have in a particular aspect of your identity, the more motivated you will be to maintain the habits associated with it. If you’re proud of how your hair looks, you’ll develop all sorts of habits to care for and maintain it. If you’re proud of the size of your biceps, you’ll make sure you never skip an upper-body workout. If you’re proud of the scarves you knit, you’ll be more likely to spend hours knitting each week. Once your pride gets involved, you’ll fight tooth and nail to maintain your habits.
True behavior change is identity change. You might start a habit because of motivation, but the only reason you’ll stick with one is that it becomes part of your identity. Anyone can convince themselves to visit the gym or eat healthy once or twice, but if you don’t shift the belief behind the behavior, then it is hard to stick with long-term changes. Improvements are only temporary until they become part of who you are.

   The goal is not to read a book, the goal is to become a reader.
   The goal is not to run a marathon, the goal is to become a runner.
  The goal is not to learn an instrument, the goal is to become a musician.

Your behaviors are usually a reflection of your identity. What you do is an indication of the type of person you believe that you are—either consciously or nonconsciously.* Research has shown that once a person believes in a particular aspect of their identity, they are more likely to act in alignment with that belief. For example, people who identified as “being a voter” were more likely to vote than those who simply claimed “voting” was an action they wanted to perform.
Similarly, the person who incorporates exercise into their identity doesn’t have to convince themselves to train. Doing the right thing is easy. After all, when your behavior and your identity are fully aligned,
 
you are no longer pursuing behavior change. You are simply acting like the type of person you already believe yourself to be.
Like all aspects of habit formation, this, too, is a double-edged sword. When working for you, identity change can be a powerful force for self-improvement. When working against you, though, identity change can be a curse. Once you have adopted an identity, it can be easy to let your allegiance to it impact your ability to change. Many people walk through life in a cognitive slumber, blindly following the norms attached to their identity.

  “I’m terrible with directions.”   “I’m not a morning person.”
  “I’m bad at remembering people’s names.”   “I’m always late.”
  “I’m not good with technology.”   “I’m horrible at math.”
. . . and a thousand other variations.
When you have repeated a story to yourself for years, it is easy to slide into these mental grooves and accept them as a fact. In time, you begin to resist certain actions because “that’s not who I am.” There is internal pressure to maintain your self-image and behave in a way that is consistent with your beliefs. You find whatever way you can to avoid contradicting yourself.
The more deeply a thought or action is tied to your identity, the more difficult it is to change it. It can feel comfortable to believe what your culture believes (group identity) or to do what upholds your self- image (personal identity), even if it’s wrong. The biggest barrier to positive change at any level—individual, team, society—is identity conflict. Good habits can make rational sense, but if they conflict with your identity, you will fail to put them into action.
On any given day, you may struggle with your habits because you’re too busy or too tired or too overwhelmed or hundreds of other reasons. Over the long run, however, the real reason you fail to stick with habits is that your self-image gets in the way. This is why you can’t get too attached to one version of your identity. Progress requires unlearning.
 
Becoming the best version of yourself requires you to continuously edit your beliefs, and to upgrade and expand your identity.
This brings us to an important question: If your beliefs and worldview play such an important role in your behavior, where do they come from in the first place? How, exactly, is your identity formed?
And how can you emphasize new aspects of your identity that serve you and gradually erase the pieces that hinder you?

THE TWO-STEP PROCESS TO CHANGING YOUR IDENTITY
Your identity emerges out of your habits. You are not born with preset beliefs. Every belief, including those about yourself, is learned and conditioned through experience.*
More precisely, your habits are how you embody your identity. When you make your bed each day, you embody the identity of an organized person. When you write each day, you embody the identity of a creative person. When you train each day, you embody the identity of an athletic person.
The more you repeat a behavior, the more you reinforce the identity associated with that behavior. In fact, the word identity was originally derived from the Latin words essentitas, which means being, and identidem, which means repeatedly. Your identity is literally your “repeated beingness.”
Whatever your identity is right now, you only believe it because you have proof of it. If you go to church every Sunday for twenty years, you have evidence that you are religious. If you study biology for one hour every night, you have evidence that you are studious. If you go to the gym even when it’s snowing, you have evidence that you are committed to fitness. The more evidence you have for a belief, the more strongly you will believe it.
For most of my early life, I didn’t consider myself a writer. If you were to ask any of my high school teachers or college professors, they would tell you I was an average writer at best: certainly not a standout. When I began my writing career, I published a new article every Monday and Thursday for the first few years. As the evidence grew, so did my identity as a writer. I didn’t start out as a writer. I became one through my habits.
 
Of course, your habits are not the only actions that influence your identity, but by virtue of their frequency they are usually the most important ones. Each experience in life modifies your self-image, but it’s unlikely you would consider yourself a soccer player because you kicked a ball once or an artist because you scribbled a picture. As you repeat these actions, however, the evidence accumulates and your self- image begins to change. The effect of one-off experiences tends to fade away while the effect of habits gets reinforced with time, which means your habits contribute most of the evidence that shapes your identity. In this way, the process of building habits is actually the process of becoming yourself.
This is a gradual evolution. We do not change by snapping our fingers and deciding to be someone entirely new. We change bit by bit, day by day, habit by habit. We are continually undergoing microevolutions of the self.
Each habit is like a suggestion: “Hey, maybe this is who I am.” If you finish a book, then perhaps you are the type of person who likes reading. If you go to the gym, then perhaps you are the type of person who likes exercise. If you practice playing the guitar, perhaps you are the type of person who likes music.
Every action you take is a vote for the type of person you wish to become. No single instance will transform your beliefs, but as the votes build up, so does the evidence of your new identity. This is one reason why meaningful change does not require radical change. Small habits can make a meaningful difference by providing evidence of a new identity. And if a change is meaningful, it actually is big. That’s the paradox of making small improvements.
Putting this all together, you can see that habits are the path to changing your identity. The most practical way to change who you are is to change what you do.

Each time you write a page, you are a writer.
Each time you practice the violin, you are a musician. Each time you start a workout, you are an athlete.
Each time you encourage your employees, you are a leader.
 
Each habit not only gets results but also teaches you something far more important: to trust yourself. You start to believe you can actually accomplish these things. When the votes mount up and the evidence begins to change, the story you tell yourself begins to change as well.
Of course, it works the opposite way, too. Every time you choose to perform a bad habit, it’s a vote for that identity. The good news is that you don’t need to be perfect. In any election, there are going to be votes for both sides. You don’t need a unanimous vote to win an election; you just need a majority. It doesn’t matter if you cast a few votes for a bad behavior or an unproductive habit. Your goal is simply to win the majority of the time.
New identities require new evidence. If you keep casting the same votes you’ve always cast, you’re going to get the same results you’ve always had. If nothing changes, nothing is going to change.
It is a simple two-step process:

1.	Decide the type of person you want to be.
2.	Prove it to yourself with small wins.

First, decide who you want to be. This holds at any level—as an individual, as a team, as a community, as a nation. What do you want to stand for? What are your principles and values? Who do you wish to become?
These are big questions, and many people aren’t sure where to begin
—but they do know what kind of results they want: to get six-pack abs or to feel less anxious or to double their salary. That’s fine. Start there and work backward from the results you want to the type of person who could get those results. Ask yourself, “Who is the type of person that could get the outcome I want?” Who is the type of person that could lose forty pounds? Who is the type of person that could learn a new language? Who is the type of person that could run a successful start-up?
For example, “Who is the type of person who could write a book?” It’s probably someone who is consistent and reliable. Now your focus shifts from writing a book (outcome-based) to being the type of person who is consistent and reliable (identity-based).
This process can lead to beliefs like:
 
  “I’m the kind of teacher who stands up for her students.”
  “I’m the kind of doctor who gives each patient the time and empathy they need.”
  “I’m the kind of manager who advocates for her employees.”

Once you have a handle on the type of person you want to be, you can begin taking small steps to reinforce your desired identity. I have a friend who lost over 100 pounds by asking herself, “What would a healthy person do?” All day long, she would use this question as a guide. Would a healthy person walk or take a cab? Would a healthy person order a burrito or a salad? She figured if she acted like a healthy person long enough, eventually she would become that person. She was right.
The concept of identity-based habits is our first introduction to another key theme in this book: feedback loops. Your habits shape your identity, and your identity shapes your habits. It’s a two-way street. The formation of all habits is a feedback loop (a concept we will explore in depth in the next chapter), but it’s important to let your values, principles, and identity drive the loop rather than your results. The focus should always be on becoming that type of person, not getting a particular outcome.

THE REAL REASON HABITS MATTER
Identity change is the North Star of habit change. The remainder of this book will provide you with step-by-step instructions on how to build better habits in yourself, your family, your team, your company, and anywhere else you wish. But the true question is: “Are you becoming the type of person you want to become?” The first step is not what or how, but who. You need to know who you want to be.
Otherwise, your quest for change is like a boat without a rudder. And that’s why we are starting here.
You have the power to change your beliefs about yourself. Your identity is not set in stone. You have a choice in every moment. You can choose the identity you want to reinforce today with the habits you choose today. And this brings us to the deeper purpose of this book and the real reason habits matter.
 
Building better habits isn’t about littering your day with life hacks.
It’s not about flossing one tooth each night or taking a cold shower each morning or wearing the same outfit each day. It’s not about achieving external measures of success like earning more money, losing weight, or reducing stress. Habits can help you achieve all of these things, but fundamentally they are not about having something. They are about becoming someone.
Ultimately, your habits matter because they help you become the type of person you wish to be. They are the channel through which you develop your deepest beliefs about yourself. Quite literally, you become your habits.

Chapter Summary
There are three levels of change: outcome change, process change, and identity change.
The most effective way to change your habits is to focus not on what you want to achieve, but on who you wish to become.
Your identity emerges out of your habits. Every action is a vote for the type of person you wish to become.
Becoming the best version of yourself requires you to continuously edit your beliefs, and to upgrade and expand your identity.
The real reason habits matter is not because they can get you better results (although they can do that), but because they can change your beliefs about yourself.
 

3
How to Build Better Habits in 4 Simple Steps
N 1898, A psychologist named Edward Thorndike conducted an experiment that would lay the foundation for our understanding of
how habits form and the rules that guide our behavior. Thorndike was interested in studying the behavior of animals, and he started by working with cats.
He would place each cat inside a device known as a puzzle box. The box was designed so that the cat could escape through a door “by some simple act, such as pulling at a loop of cord, pressing a lever, or stepping on a platform.” For example, one box contained a lever that, when pressed, would open a door on the side of the box. Once the door had been opened, the cat could dart out and run over to a bowl of food.
Most cats wanted to escape as soon as they were placed inside the box. They would poke their nose into the corners, stick their paws through openings, and claw at loose objects. After a few minutes of exploration, the cats would happen to press the magical lever, the door would open, and they would escape.
Thorndike tracked the behavior of each cat across many trials. In the beginning, the animals moved around the box at random. But as soon as the lever had been pressed and the door opened, the process of learning began. Gradually, each cat learned to associate the action of pressing the lever with the reward of escaping the box and getting to the food.
After twenty to thirty trials, this behavior became so automatic and habitual that the cat could escape within a few seconds. For example,
 
Thorndike noted, “Cat 12 took the following times to perform the act. 160 seconds, 30 seconds, 90 seconds, 60, 15, 28, 20, 30, 22, 11, 15, 20,
12, 10, 14, 10, 8, 8, 5, 10, 8, 6, 6, 7.”
During the first three trials, the cat escaped in an average of 1.5 minutes. During the last three trials, it escaped in an average of 6.3 seconds. With practice, each cat made fewer errors and their actions became quicker and more automatic. Rather than repeat the same mistakes, the cat began to cut straight to the solution.
From his studies, Thorndike described the learning process by stating, “behaviors followed by satisfying consequences tend to be repeated and those that produce unpleasant consequences are less likely to be repeated.” His work provides the perfect starting point for discussing how habits form in our own lives. It also provides answers to some fundamental questions like: What are habits? And why does the brain bother building them at all?

WHY YOUR BRAIN BUILDS HABITS
A habit is a behavior that has been repeated enough times to become automatic. The process of habit formation begins with trial and error. Whenever you encounter a new situation in life, your brain has to make a decision. How do I respond to this? The first time you come across a problem, you’re not sure how to solve it. Like Thorndike’s cat, you’re just trying things out to see what works.
Neurological activity in the brain is high during this period. You are carefully analyzing the situation and making conscious decisions about how to act. You’re taking in tons of new information and trying to make sense of it all. The brain is busy learning the most effective course of action.
Occasionally, like a cat pressing on a lever, you stumble across a solution. You’re feeling anxious, and you discover that going for a run calms you down. You’re mentally exhausted from a long day of work, and you learn that playing video games relaxes you. You’re exploring, exploring, exploring, and then—BAM—a reward.
After you stumble upon an unexpected reward, you alter your strategy for next time. Your brain immediately begins to catalog the
 
events that preceded the reward. Wait a minute—that felt good. What did I do right before that?
This is the feedback loop behind all human behavior: try, fail, learn, try differently. With practice, the useless movements fade away and the useful actions get reinforced. That’s a habit forming.
Whenever you face a problem repeatedly, your brain begins to automate the process of solving it. Your habits are just a series of automatic solutions that solve the problems and stresses you face regularly. As behavioral scientist Jason Hreha writes, “Habits are, simply, reliable solutions to recurring problems in our environment.”
As habits are created, the level of activity in the brain decreases.
You learn to lock in on the cues that predict success and tune out everything else. When a similar situation arises in the future, you know exactly what to look for. There is no longer a need to analyze every angle of a situation. Your brain skips the process of trial and error and creates a mental rule: if this, then that. These cognitive scripts can be followed automatically whenever the situation is appropriate. Now, whenever you feel stressed, you get the itch to run. As soon as you walk in the door from work, you grab the video game controller. A choice that once required effort is now automatic. A habit has been created.
Habits are mental shortcuts learned from experience. In a sense, a habit is just a memory of the steps you previously followed to solve a problem in the past. Whenever the conditions are right, you can draw on this memory and automatically apply the same solution. The primary reason the brain remembers the past is to better predict what will work in the future.
Habit formation is incredibly useful because the conscious mind is the bottleneck of the brain. It can only pay attention to one problem at a time. As a result, your brain is always working to preserve your conscious attention for whatever task is most essential. Whenever possible, the conscious mind likes to pawn off tasks to the nonconscious mind to do automatically. This is precisely what happens when a habit is formed. Habits reduce cognitive load and free up mental capacity, so you can allocate your attention to other tasks.
Despite their efficiency, some people still wonder about the benefits of habits. The argument goes like this: “Will habits make my life dull? I don’t want to pigeonhole myself into a lifestyle I don’t enjoy. Doesn’t
 
so much routine take away the vibrancy and spontaneity of life?” Hardly. Such questions set up a false dichotomy. They make you think that you have to choose between building habits and attaining freedom. In reality, the two complement each other.
Habits do not restrict freedom. They create it. In fact, the people who don’t have their habits handled are often the ones with the least amount of freedom. Without good financial habits, you will always be struggling for the next dollar. Without good health habits, you will always seem to be short on energy. Without good learning habits, you will always feel like you’re behind the curve. If you’re always being forced to make decisions about simple tasks—when should I work out, where do I go to write, when do I pay the bills—then you have less time for freedom. It’s only by making the fundamentals of life easier that you can create the mental space needed for free thinking and creativity.
Conversely, when you have your habits dialed in and the basics of life are handled and done, your mind is free to focus on new challenges and master the next set of problems. Building habits in the present allows you to do more of what you want in the future.

THE SCIENCE OF HOW HABITS WORK
The process of building a habit can be divided into four simple steps: cue, craving, response, and reward.* Breaking it down into these fundamental parts can help us understand what a habit is, how it works, and how to improve it.

FIGURE 5: All habits proceed through four stages in the same order: cue, craving, response, and reward.

This four-step pattern is the backbone of every habit, and your brain runs through these steps in the same order each time.
 
First, there is the cue. The cue triggers your brain to initiate a behavior. It is a bit of information that predicts a reward. Our prehistoric ancestors were paying attention to cues that signaled the location of primary rewards like food, water, and sex. Today, we spend most of our time learning cues that predict secondary rewards like money and fame, power and status, praise and approval, love and friendship, or a sense of personal satisfaction. (Of course, these pursuits also indirectly improve our odds of survival and reproduction, which is the deeper motive behind everything we do.)
Your mind is continuously analyzing your internal and external environment for hints of where rewards are located. Because the cue is the first indication that we’re close to a reward, it naturally leads to a craving.
Cravings are the second step, and they are the motivational force behind every habit. Without some level of motivation or desire— without craving a change—we have no reason to act. What you crave is not the habit itself but the change in state it delivers. You do not crave smoking a cigarette, you crave the feeling of relief it provides. You are not motivated by brushing your teeth but rather by the feeling of a clean mouth. You do not want to turn on the television, you want to be entertained. Every craving is linked to a desire to change your internal state. This is an important point that we will discuss in detail later.
Cravings differ from person to person. In theory, any piece of information could trigger a craving, but in practice, people are not motivated by the same cues. For a gambler, the sound of slot machines can be a potent trigger that sparks an intense wave of desire. For someone who rarely gambles, the jingles and chimes of the casino are just background noise. Cues are meaningless until they are interpreted. The thoughts, feelings, and emotions of the observer are what transform a cue into a craving.
The third step is the response. The response is the actual habit you perform, which can take the form of a thought or an action. Whether a response occurs depends on how motivated you are and how much friction is associated with the behavior. If a particular action requires more physical or mental effort than you are willing to expend, then you won’t do it. Your response also depends on your ability. It sounds simple, but a habit can occur only if you are capable of doing it. If you
 
want to dunk a basketball but can’t jump high enough to reach the hoop, well, you’re out of luck.
Finally, the response delivers a reward. Rewards are the end goal of every habit. The cue is about noticing the reward. The craving is about wanting the reward. The response is about obtaining the reward. We chase rewards because they serve two purposes: (1) they satisfy us and
(2) they teach us.
The first purpose of rewards is to satisfy your craving. Yes, rewards provide benefits on their own. Food and water deliver the energy you need to survive. Getting a promotion brings more money and respect. Getting in shape improves your health and your dating prospects. But the more immediate benefit is that rewards satisfy your craving to eat or to gain status or to win approval. At least for a moment, rewards deliver contentment and relief from craving.
Second, rewards teach us which actions are worth remembering in the future. Your brain is a reward detector. As you go about your life, your sensory nervous system is continuously monitoring which actions satisfy your desires and deliver pleasure. Feelings of pleasure and disappointment are part of the feedback mechanism that helps your brain distinguish useful actions from useless ones. Rewards close the feedback loop and complete the habit cycle.
If a behavior is insufficient in any of the four stages, it will not become a habit. Eliminate the cue and your habit will never start. Reduce the craving and you won’t experience enough motivation to act. Make the behavior difficult and you won’t be able to do it. And if the reward fails to satisfy your desire, then you’ll have no reason to do it again in the future. Without the first three steps, a behavior will not occur. Without all four, a behavior will not be repeated.

THE HABIT LOOP
 


FIGURE 6: The four stages of habit are best described as a feedback loop. They form an endless cycle that is running every moment you are alive. This “habit loop” is continually scanning the environment, predicting what will happen next, trying out different responses, and learning from the results.*

In summary, the cue triggers a craving, which motivates a response, which provides a reward, which satisfies the craving and, ultimately, becomes associated with the cue. Together, these four steps form a neurological feedback loop—cue, craving, response, reward; cue, craving, response, reward—that ultimately allows you to create automatic habits. This cycle is known as the habit loop.
This four-step process is not something that happens occasionally, but rather it is an endless feedback loop that is running and active during every moment you are alive—even now. The brain is continually scanning the environment, predicting what will happen next, trying out different responses, and learning from the results. The entire process is completed in a split second, and we use it again and again without realizing everything that has been packed into the previous moment.
We can split these four steps into two phases: the problem phase and the solution phase. The problem phase includes the cue and the craving, and it is when you realize that something needs to change. The solution phase includes the response and the reward, and it is when you take action and achieve the change you desire.
 


Problem phase
1.	Cue
2.	Craving
Solution phase
3.	Response
4.	Reward
All behavior is driven by the desire to solve a problem. Sometimes the problem is that you notice something good and you want to obtain it. Sometimes the problem is that you are experiencing pain and you want to relieve it. Either way, the purpose of every habit is to solve the problems you face.
In the table on the following page, you can see a few examples of what this looks like in real life.
Imagine walking into a dark room and flipping on the light switch.
You have performed this simple habit so many times that it occurs without thinking. You proceed through all four stages in the fraction of a second. The urge to act strikes you without thinking.


Problem phase
1.	Cue: Your phone buzzes with a new text message.
2.	Craving: You want to learn the contents of the message.
Solution phase
3.	Response: You grab your phone and read the text.
4.	Reward: You satisfy your craving to read the message. Grabbing your phone becomes associated with your phone buzzing.


Problem phase
1.	Cue: You are answering emails.
2.	Craving: You begin to feel stressed and overwhelmed by work. You want to feel in control.
Solution phase
3.	Response: You bite your nails.
4.	Reward: You satisfy your craving to reduce stress. Biting your nails becomes associated with answering email.


Problem phase
1.	Cue: You wake up.
2.	Craving: You want to feel alert.
Solution phase

 
3.	Response: You drink a cup of coffee.
4.	Reward: You satisfy your craving to feel alert. Drinking coffee becomes associated with waking up.


Problem phase
1.	Cue: You smell a doughnut shop as you walk down the street near your office.
2.	Craving: You begin to crave a doughnut.
Solution phase
3.	Response: You buy a doughnut and eat it.
4.	Reward: You satisfy your craving to eat a doughnut. Buying a doughnut becomes associated with walking down the street near your office.


Problem phase
1.	Cue: You hit a stumbling block on a project at work.
2.	Craving: You feel stuck and want to relieve your frustration.
Solution phase
3.	Response: You pull out your phone and check social media.
4.	Reward: You satisfy your craving to feel relieved. Checking social media becomes associated with feeling stalled at work.


Problem phase
1.	Cue: You walk into a dark room.
2.	Craving: You want to be able to see.
Solution phase
3.	Response: You flip the light switch.
4.	Reward: You satisfy your craving to see. Turning on the light switch becomes associated with being in a dark room.
By the time we become adults, we rarely notice the habits that are running our lives. Most of us never give a second thought to the fact that we tie the same shoe first each morning, or unplug the toaster after each use, or always change into comfortable clothes after getting home from work. After decades of mental programming, we automatically slip into these patterns of thinking and acting.

THE FOUR LAWS OF BEHAVIOR CHANGE
In the following chapters, we will see time and again how the four stages of cue, craving, response, and reward influence nearly everything we do each day. But before we do that, we need to
 
transform these four steps into a practical framework that we can use to design good habits and eliminate bad ones.
I refer to this framework as the Four Laws of Behavior Change, and it provides a simple set of rules for creating good habits and breaking bad ones. You can think of each law as a lever that influences human behavior. When the levers are in the right positions, creating good habits is effortless. When they are in the wrong positions, it is nearly impossible.


How to Create a Good Habit
The 1st law (Cue): Make it obvious.
The 2nd law (Craving): Make it attractive.
The 3rd law (Response): Make it easy.
The 4th law (Reward): Make it satisfying.
We can invert these laws to learn how to break a bad habit.


How to Break a Bad Habit
Inversion of the 1st law (Cue): Make it invisible. Inversion of the 2nd law (Craving): Make it unattractive. Inversion of the 3rd law (Response): Make it difficult.
Inversion of the 4th law (Reward): Make it unsatisfying.
It would be irresponsible for me to claim that these four laws are an exhaustive framework for changing any human behavior, but I think they’re close. As you will soon see, the Four Laws of Behavior Change apply to nearly every field, from sports to politics, art to medicine, comedy to management. These laws can be used no matter what challenge you are facing. There is no need for completely different strategies for each habit.
Whenever you want to change your behavior, you can simply ask yourself:

1.	How can I make it obvious?
2.	How can I make it attractive?
3.	How can I make it easy?
4.	How can I make it satisfying?
 
If you have ever wondered, “Why don’t I do what I say I’m going to do? Why don’t I lose the weight or stop smoking or save for retirement or start that side business? Why do I say something is important but never seem to make time for it?” The answers to those questions can be found somewhere in these four laws. The key to creating good habits and breaking bad ones is to understand these fundamental laws and how to alter them to your specifications. Every goal is doomed to fail if it goes against the grain of human nature.
Your habits are shaped by the systems in your life. In the chapters that follow, we will discuss these laws one by one and show how you can use them to create a system in which good habits emerge naturally and bad habits wither away.

Chapter Summary
  A habit is a behavior that has been repeated enough times to become automatic.
  The ultimate purpose of habits is to solve the problems of life with as little energy and effort as possible.
  Any habit can be broken down into a feedback loop that involves four steps: cue, craving, response, and reward.
  The Four Laws of Behavior Change are a simple set of rules we can use to build better habits. They are (1) make it obvious, (2) make it attractive, (3) make it easy, and (4) make it satisfying.
 
 

4
The Man Who Didn’t Look Right
THE PSYCHOLOGIST GARY Klein once told me a story about a woman who attended a family gathering. She had spent years working as a paramedic and, upon arriving at the event, took one look at her father- in-law and got very concerned.
“I don’t like the way you look,” she said.
Her father-in-law, who was feeling perfectly fine, jokingly replied, “Well, I don’t like your looks, either.”
“No,” she insisted. “You need to go to the hospital now.”
A few hours later, the man was undergoing lifesaving surgery after an examination had revealed that he had a blockage to a major artery and was at immediate risk of a heart attack. Without his daughter-in- law’s intuition, he could have died.
What did the paramedic see? How did she predict his impending heart attack?
When major arteries are obstructed, the body focuses on sending blood to critical organs and away from peripheral locations near the surface of the skin. The result is a change in the pattern of distribution of blood in the face. After many years of working with people with heart failure, the woman had unknowingly developed the ability to recognize this pattern on sight. She couldn’t explain what it was that she noticed in her father-in-law’s face, but she knew something was wrong.
Similar stories exist in other fields. For example, military analysts can identify which blip on a radar screen is an enemy missile and
 
which one is a plane from their own fleet even though they are traveling at the same speed, flying at the same altitude, and look identical on radar in nearly every respect. During the Gulf War, Lieutenant Commander Michael Riley saved an entire battleship when he ordered a missile shot down—despite the fact that it looked exactly like the battleship’s own planes on radar. He made the right call, but even his superior officers couldn’t explain how he did it.
Museum curators have been known to discern the difference between an authentic piece of art and an expertly produced counterfeit even though they can’t tell you precisely which details tipped them off. Experienced radiologists can look at a brain scan and predict the area where a stroke will develop before any obvious signs are visible to the untrained eye. I’ve even heard of hairdressers noticing whether a client is pregnant based only on the feel of her hair.
The human brain is a prediction machine. It is continuously taking in your surroundings and analyzing the information it comes across. Whenever you experience something repeatedly—like a paramedic seeing the face of a heart attack patient or a military analyst seeing a missile on a radar screen—your brain begins noticing what is important, sorting through the details and highlighting the relevant cues, and cataloging that information for future use.
With enough practice, you can pick up on the cues that predict certain outcomes without consciously thinking about it. Automatically, your brain encodes the lessons learned through experience. We can’t always explain what it is we are learning, but learning is happening all along the way, and your ability to notice the relevant cues in a given situation is the foundation for every habit you have.
We underestimate how much our brains and bodies can do without thinking. You do not tell your hair to grow, your heart to pump, your lungs to breathe, or your stomach to digest. And yet your body handles all this and more on autopilot. You are much more than your conscious self.
Consider hunger. How do you know when you’re hungry? You don’t necessarily have to see a cookie on the counter to realize that it is time to eat. Appetite and hunger are governed nonconsciously. Your body has a variety of feedback loops that gradually alert you when it is time to eat again and that track what is going on around you and within you. Cravings can arise thanks to hormones and chemicals circulating
 
through your body. Suddenly, you’re hungry even though you’re not quite sure what tipped you off.
This is one of the most surprising insights about our habits: you don’t need to be aware of the cue for a habit to begin. You can notice an opportunity and take action without dedicating conscious attention to it. This is what makes habits useful.
It’s also what makes them dangerous. As habits form, your actions come under the direction of your automatic and nonconscious mind. You fall into old patterns before you realize what’s happening. Unless someone points it out, you may not notice that you cover your mouth with your hand whenever you laugh, that you apologize before asking a question, or that you have a habit of finishing other people’s sentences. And the more you repeat these patterns, the less likely you become to question what you’re doing and why you’re doing it.
I once heard of a retail clerk who was instructed to cut up empty gift cards after customers had used up the balance on the card. One day, the clerk cashed out a few customers in a row who purchased with gift cards. When the next person walked up, the clerk swiped the customer’s actual credit card, picked up the scissors, and then cut it in half—entirely on autopilot—before looking up at the stunned customer and realizing what had just happened.
Another woman I came across in my research was a former preschool teacher who had switched to a corporate job. Even though she was now working with adults, her old habits would kick in and she kept asking coworkers if they had washed their hands after going to the bathroom. I also found the story of a man who had spent years working as a lifeguard and would occasionally yell “Walk!” whenever he saw a child running.
Over time, the cues that spark our habits become so common that they are essentially invisible: the treats on the kitchen counter, the remote control next to the couch, the phone in our pocket. Our responses to these cues are so deeply encoded that it may feel like the urge to act comes from nowhere. For this reason, we must begin the process of behavior change with awareness.
Before we can effectively build new habits, we need to get a handle on our current ones. This can be more challenging than it sounds because once a habit is firmly rooted in your life, it is mostly
 
nonconscious and automatic. If a habit remains mindless, you can’t expect to improve it. As the psychologist Carl Jung said, “Until you make the unconscious conscious, it will direct your life and you will call it fate.”

THE HABITS SCORECARD
The Japanese railway system is regarded as one of the best in the world. If you ever find yourself riding a train in Tokyo, you’ll notice that the conductors have a peculiar habit.
As each operator runs the train, they proceed through a ritual of pointing at different objects and calling out commands. When the train approaches a signal, the operator will point at it and say, “Signal is green.” As the train pulls into and out of each station, the operator will point at the speedometer and call out the exact speed. When it’s time to leave, the operator will point at the timetable and state the time. Out on the platform, other employees are performing similar actions.
Before each train departs, staff members will point along the edge of the platform and declare, “All clear!” Every detail is identified, pointed at, and named aloud.*
This process, known as Pointing-and-Calling, is a safety system designed to reduce mistakes. It seems silly, but it works incredibly well. Pointing-and-Calling reduces errors by up to 85 percent and cuts accidents by 30 percent. The MTA subway system in New York City adopted a modified version that is “point-only,” and “within two years of implementation, incidents of incorrectly berthed subways fell 57 percent.”
Pointing-and-Calling is so effective because it raises the level of awareness from a nonconscious habit to a more conscious level.
Because the train operators must use their eyes, hands, mouth, and ears, they are more likely to notice problems before something goes wrong.
My wife does something similar. Whenever we are preparing to walk out the door for a trip, she verbally calls out the most essential items in her packing list. “I’ve got my keys. I’ve got my wallet. I’ve got my glasses. I’ve got my husband.”
 
The more automatic a behavior becomes, the less likely we are to consciously think about it. And when we’ve done something a thousand times before, we begin to overlook things. We assume that the next time will be just like the last. We’re so used to doing what we’ve always done that we don’t stop to question whether it’s the right thing to do at all. Many of our failures in performance are largely attributable to a lack of self-awareness.
One of our greatest challenges in changing habits is maintaining awareness of what we are actually doing. This helps explain why the consequences of bad habits can sneak up on us. We need a “point-and- call” system for our personal lives. That’s the origin of the Habits Scorecard, which is a simple exercise you can use to become more aware of your behavior. To create your own, make a list of your daily habits.
Here’s a sample of where your list might start:

  Wake up
  Turn off alarm
  Check my phone
  Go to the bathroom   Weigh myself
  Take a shower   Brush my teeth   Floss my teeth
  Put on deodorant
  Hang up towel to dry   Get dressed
  Make a cup of tea

. . . and so on.
Once you have a full list, look at each behavior, and ask yourself, “Is this a good habit, a bad habit, or a neutral habit?” If it is a good habit, write “+” next to it. If it is a bad habit, write “–”. If it is a neutral habit, write “=”.
 
For example, the list above might look like this:

  Wake up =
  Turn off alarm =
  Check my phone –
  Go to the bathroom =   Weigh myself +
  Take a shower +   Brush my teeth +   Floss my teeth +
  Put on deodorant +
  Hang up towel to dry =   Get dressed =
  Make a cup of tea +

The marks you give to a particular habit will depend on your situation and your goals. For someone who is trying to lose weight, eating a bagel with peanut butter every morning might be a bad habit. For someone who is trying to bulk up and add muscle, the same behavior might be a good habit. It all depends on what you’re working toward.*
Scoring your habits can be a bit more complex for another reason as well. The labels “good habit” and “bad habit” are slightly inaccurate.
There are no good habits or bad habits. There are only effective habits. That is, effective at solving problems. All habits serve you in some way
—even the bad ones—which is why you repeat them. For this exercise, categorize your habits by how they will benefit you in the long run.
Generally speaking, good habits will have net positive outcomes. Bad habits have net negative outcomes. Smoking a cigarette may reduce stress right now (that’s how it’s serving you), but it’s not a healthy long-term behavior.
If you’re still having trouble determining how to rate a particular habit, here is a question I like to use: “Does this behavior help me become the type of person I wish to be? Does this habit cast a vote for
 
or against my desired identity?” Habits that reinforce your desired identity are usually good. Habits that conflict with your desired identity are usually bad.
As you create your Habits Scorecard, there is no need to change anything at first. The goal is to simply notice what is actually going on. Observe your thoughts and actions without judgment or internal criticism. Don’t blame yourself for your faults. Don’t praise yourself for your successes.
If you eat a chocolate bar every morning, acknowledge it, almost as if you were watching someone else. Oh, how interesting that they would do such a thing. If you binge-eat, simply notice that you are eating more calories than you should. If you waste time online, notice that you are spending your life in a way that you do not want to.
The first step to changing bad habits is to be on the lookout for them. If you feel like you need extra help, then you can try Pointing- and-Calling in your own life. Say out loud the action that you are thinking of taking and what the outcome will be. If you want to cut back on your junk food habit but notice yourself grabbing another cookie, say out loud, “I’m about to eat this cookie, but I don’t need it. Eating it will cause me to gain weight and hurt my health.”
Hearing your bad habits spoken aloud makes the consequences seem more real. It adds weight to the action rather than letting yourself mindlessly slip into an old routine. This approach is useful even if you’re simply trying to remember a task on your to-do list. Just saying out loud, “Tomorrow, I need to go to the post office after lunch,” increases the odds that you’ll actually do it. You’re getting yourself to acknowledge the need for action—and that can make all the difference.
The process of behavior change always starts with awareness. Strategies like Pointing-and-Calling and the Habits Scorecard are focused on getting you to recognize your habits and acknowledge the cues that trigger them, which makes it possible to respond in a way that benefits you.

Chapter Summary
With enough practice, your brain will pick up on the cues that predict certain outcomes without consciously thinking about it.
 
Once our habits become automatic, we stop paying attention to what we are doing.
The process of behavior change always starts with awareness. You need to be aware of your habits before you can change them.
Pointing-and-Calling raises your level of awareness from a nonconscious habit to a more conscious level by verbalizing your actions.
The Habits Scorecard is a simple exercise you can use to become more aware of your behavior.
 

5
The Best Way to Start a New Habit
N 2001, RESEARCHERS in Great Britain began working with 248 people to build better exercise habits over the course of two weeks. The
subjects were divided into three groups.
The first group was the control group. They were simply asked to track how often they exercised.
The second group was the “motivation” group. They were asked not only to track their workouts but also to read some material on the benefits of exercise. The researchers also explained to the group how exercise could reduce the risk of coronary heart disease and improve heart health.
Finally, there was the third group. These subjects received the same presentation as the second group, which ensured that they had equal levels of motivation. However, they were also asked to formulate a plan for when and where they would exercise over the following week.
Specifically, each member of the third group completed the following sentence: “During the next week, I will partake in at least 20 minutes of vigorous exercise on [DAY] at [TIME] in [PLACE].”
In the first and second groups, 35 to 38 percent of people exercised at least once per week. (Interestingly, the motivational presentation given to the second group seemed to have no meaningful impact on behavior.) But 91 percent of the third group exercised at least once per week—more than double the normal rate.
The sentence they filled out is what researchers refer to as an
implementation intention, which is a plan you make beforehand about
 
when and where to act. That is, how you intend to implement a particular habit.
The cues that can trigger a habit come in a wide range of forms—the feel of your phone buzzing in your pocket, the smell of chocolate chip cookies, the sound of ambulance sirens—but the two most common cues are time and location. Implementation intentions leverage both of these cues.
Broadly speaking, the format for creating an implementation intention is:
“When situation X arises, I will perform response Y.”
Hundreds of studies have shown that implementation intentions are effective for sticking to our goals, whether it’s writing down the exact time and date of when you will get a flu shot or recording the time of your colonoscopy appointment. They increase the odds that people will stick with habits like recycling, studying, going to sleep early, and stopping smoking.
Researchers have even found that voter turnout increases when people are forced to create implementation intentions by answering questions like: “What route are you taking to the polling station? At what time are you planning to go? What bus will get you there?” Other successful government programs have prompted citizens to make a clear plan to send taxes in on time or provided directions on when and where to pay late traffic bills.
The punch line is clear: people who make a specific plan for when and where they will perform a new habit are more likely to follow through. Too many people try to change their habits without these basic details figured out. We tell ourselves, “I’m going to eat healthier” or “I’m going to write more,” but we never say when and where these habits are going to happen. We leave it up to chance and hope that we will “just remember to do it” or feel motivated at the right time. An implementation intention sweeps away foggy notions like “I want to work out more” or “I want to be more productive” or “I should vote” and transforms them into a concrete plan of action.
Many people think they lack motivation when what they really lack is clarity. It is not always obvious when and where to take action. Some people spend their entire lives waiting for the time to be right to make an improvement.
 
Once an implementation intention has been set, you don’t have to wait for inspiration to strike. Do I write a chapter today or not? Do I meditate this morning or at lunch? When the moment of action occurs, there is no need to make a decision. Simply follow your predetermined plan.
The simple way to apply this strategy to your habits is to fill out this sentence:
I will [BEHAVIOR] at [TIME] in [LOCATION].
  Meditation. I will meditate for one minute at 7 a.m. in my kitchen.
  Studying. I will study Spanish for twenty minutes at 6 p.m. in my bedroom.
  Exercise. I will exercise for one hour at 5 p.m. in my local gym.
  Marriage. I will make my partner a cup of tea at 8 a.m. in the kitchen.

If you aren’t sure when to start your habit, try the first day of the week, month, or year. People are more likely to take action at those times because hope is usually higher. If we have hope, we have a reason to take action. A fresh start feels motivating.
There is another benefit to implementation intentions. Being specific about what you want and how you will achieve it helps you say no to things that derail progress, distract your attention, and pull you off course. We often say yes to little requests because we are not clear enough about what we need to be doing instead. When your dreams are vague, it’s easy to rationalize little exceptions all day long and never get around to the specific things you need to do to succeed.
Give your habits a time and a space to live in the world. The goal is to make the time and location so obvious that, with enough repetition, you get an urge to do the right thing at the right time, even if you can’t say why. As the writer Jason Zweig noted, “Obviously you’re never going to just work out without conscious thought. But like a dog salivating at a bell, maybe you start to get antsy around the time of day you normally work out.”
There are many ways to use implementation intentions in your life and work. My favorite approach is one I learned from Stanford professor BJ Fogg and it is a strategy I refer to as habit stacking.
 
HABIT STACKING: A SIMPLE PLAN TO OVERHAUL YOUR HABITS
The French philosopher Denis Diderot lived nearly his entire life in poverty, but that all changed one day in 1765.
Diderot’s daughter was about to be married and he could not afford to pay for the wedding. Despite his lack of wealth, Diderot was well known for his role as the co-founder and writer of Encyclopédie, one of the most comprehensive encyclopedias of the time. When Catherine the Great, the Empress of Russia, heard of Diderot’s financial troubles, her heart went out to him. She was a book lover and greatly enjoyed his encyclopedia. She offered to buy Diderot’s personal library for £1,000
—more than $150,000 today.* Suddenly, Diderot had money to spare. With his new wealth, he not only paid for the wedding but also acquired a scarlet robe for himself.
Diderot’s scarlet robe was beautiful. So beautiful, in fact, that he immediately noticed how out of place it seemed when surrounded by his more common possessions. He wrote that there was “no more coordination, no more unity, no more beauty” between his elegant robe and the rest of his stuff.
Diderot soon felt the urge to upgrade his possessions. He replaced his rug with one from Damascus. He decorated his home with expensive sculptures. He bought a mirror to place above the mantel, and a better kitchen table. He tossed aside his old straw chair for a leather one. Like falling dominoes, one purchase led to the next.
Diderot’s behavior is not uncommon. In fact, the tendency for one purchase to lead to another one has a name: the Diderot Effect. The Diderot Effect states that obtaining a new possession often creates a spiral of consumption that leads to additional purchases.
You can spot this pattern everywhere. You buy a dress and have to get new shoes and earrings to match. You buy a couch and suddenly question the layout of your entire living room. You buy a toy for your child and soon find yourself purchasing all of the accessories that go with it. It’s a chain reaction of purchases.
Many human behaviors follow this cycle. You often decide what to do next based on what you have just finished doing. Going to the bathroom leads to washing and drying your hands, which reminds you that you need to put the dirty towels in the laundry, so you add laundry
 
detergent to the shopping list, and so on. No behavior happens in isolation. Each action becomes a cue that triggers the next behavior.
Why is this important?
When it comes to building new habits, you can use the connectedness of behavior to your advantage. One of the best ways to build a new habit is to identify a current habit you already do each day and then stack your new behavior on top. This is called habit stacking.
Habit stacking is a special form of an implementation intention.
Rather than pairing your new habit with a particular time and location, you pair it with a current habit. This method, which was created by BJ Fogg as part of his Tiny Habits program, can be used to design an obvious cue for nearly any habit.*
The habit stacking formula is:
“After [CURRENT HABIT], I will [NEW HABIT].”
For example:

  Meditation. After I pour my cup of coffee each morning, I will meditate for one minute.
  Exercise. After I take off my work shoes, I will immediately change into my workout clothes.
  Gratitude. After I sit down to dinner, I will say one thing I’m grateful for that happened today.
  Marriage. After I get into bed at night, I will give my partner a kiss.
  Safety. After I put on my running shoes, I will text a friend or family member where I am running and how long it will take.

The key is to tie your desired behavior into something you already do each day. Once you have mastered this basic structure, you can begin to create larger stacks by chaining small habits together. This allows you to take advantage of the natural momentum that comes from one behavior leading into the next—a positive version of the Diderot Effect.
 
HABIT STACKING


FIGURE 7: Habit stacking increases the likelihood that you’ll stick with a habit by stacking your new behavior on top of an old one. This process can be repeated to chain numerous habits together, each one acting as the cue for the next.

Your morning routine habit stack might look like this:

1.	After I pour my morning cup of coffee, I will meditate for sixty seconds.
2.	After I meditate for sixty seconds, I will write my to-do list for the day.
3.	After I write my to-do list for the day, I will immediately begin my first task.

Or, consider this habit stack in the evening:
 
1.	After I finish eating dinner, I will put my plate directly into the dishwasher.
2.	After I put my dishes away, I will immediately wipe down the counter.
3.	After I wipe down the counter, I will set out my coffee mug for tomorrow morning.

You can also insert new behaviors into the middle of your current routines. For example, you may already have a morning routine that looks like this: Wake up > Make my bed > Take a shower. Let’s say you want to develop the habit of reading more each night. You can expand your habit stack and try something like: Wake up > Make my bed > Place a book on my pillow > Take a shower. Now, when you climb into bed each night, a book will be sitting there waiting for you to enjoy.
Overall, habit stacking allows you to create a set of simple rules that guide your future behavior. It’s like you always have a game plan for which action should come next. Once you get comfortable with this approach, you can develop general habit stacks to guide you whenever the situation is appropriate:

Exercise. When I see a set of stairs, I will take them instead of using the elevator.
Social skills. When I walk into a party, I will introduce myself to someone I don’t know yet.
Finances. When I want to buy something over $100, I will wait twenty-four hours before purchasing.
Healthy eating. When I serve myself a meal, I will always put veggies on my plate first.
Minimalism. When I buy a new item, I will give something away. (“One in, one out.”)
Mood. When the phone rings, I will take one deep breath and smile before answering.
Forgetfulness. When I leave a public place, I will check the table and chairs to make sure I don’t leave anything behind.
 
No matter how you use this strategy, the secret to creating a successful habit stack is selecting the right cue to kick things off. Unlike an implementation intention, which specifically states the time and location for a given behavior, habit stacking implicitly has the time and location built into it. When and where you choose to insert a habit into your daily routine can make a big difference. If you’re trying to add meditation into your morning routine but mornings are chaotic and your kids keep running into the room, then that may be the wrong place and time. Consider when you are most likely to be successful.
Don’t ask yourself to do a habit when you’re likely to be occupied with something else.
Your cue should also have the same frequency as your desired habit.
If you want to do a habit every day, but you stack it on top of a habit that only happens on Mondays, that’s not a good choice.
One way to find the right trigger for your habit stack is by brainstorming a list of your current habits. You can use your Habits Scorecard from the last chapter as a starting point. Alternatively, you can create a list with two columns. In the first column, write down the habits you do each day without fail.*
For example:

Get out of bed. Take a shower. Brush your teeth. Get dressed.
Brew a cup of coffee. Eat breakfast.
Take the kids to school. Start the work day.
Eat lunch.
End the work day.
Change out of work clothes. Sit down for dinner.
 
  Turn off the lights.   Get into bed.
Your list can be much longer, but you get the idea. In the second column, write down all of the things that happen to you each day without fail. For example:

  The sun rises.
  You get a text message.
  The song you are listening to ends.   The sun sets.
Armed with these two lists, you can begin searching for the best place to layer your new habit into your lifestyle.
Habit stacking works best when the cue is highly specific and immediately actionable. Many people select cues that are too vague. I made this mistake myself. When I wanted to start a push-up habit, my habit stack was “When I take a break for lunch, I will do ten push-ups.” At first glance, this sounded reasonable. But soon, I realized the trigger was unclear. Would I do my push-ups before I ate lunch? After I ate lunch? Where would I do them? After a few inconsistent days, I changed my habit stack to: “When I close my laptop for lunch, I will do ten push-ups next to my desk.” Ambiguity gone.
Habits like “read more” or “eat better” are worthy causes, but these goals do not provide instruction on how and when to act. Be specific and clear: After I close the door. After I brush my teeth. After I sit down at the table. The specificity is important. The more tightly bound your new habit is to a specific cue, the better the odds are that you will notice when the time comes to act.
The 1st Law of Behavior Change is to make it obvious. Strategies like implementation intentions and habit stacking are among the most practical ways to create obvious cues for your habits and design a clear plan for when and where to take action.

Chapter Summary
  The 1st Law of Behavior Change is make it obvious.
 
The two most common cues are time and location.
Creating an implementation intention is a strategy you can use to pair a new habit with a specific time and location.
The implementation intention formula is: I will [BEHAVIOR] at [TIME] in [LOCATION].
Habit stacking is a strategy you can use to pair a new habit with a current habit.
The habit stacking formula is: After [CURRENT HABIT], I will [NEW HABIT].
 

6
Motivation Is Overrated; Environment Often Matters More
ANNE THORNDIKE, A primary care physician at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston, had a crazy idea. She believed she could improve the eating habits of thousands of hospital staff and visitors without changing their willpower or motivation in the slightest way. In fact, she didn’t plan on talking to them at all.
Thorndike and her colleagues designed a six-month study to alter the “choice architecture” of the hospital cafeteria. They started by changing how drinks were arranged in the room. Originally, the refrigerators located next to the cash registers in the cafeteria were filled with only soda. The researchers added water as an option to each one. Additionally, they placed baskets of bottled water next to the food stations throughout the room. Soda was still in the primary refrigerators, but water was now available at all drink locations.
Over the next three months, the number of soda sales at the hospital dropped by 11.4 percent. Meanwhile, sales of bottled water increased by 25.8 percent. They made similar adjustments—and saw similar results—with the food in the cafeteria. Nobody had said a word to anyone eating there.

BEFORE	AFTER
 


FIGURE 8: Here is a representation of what the cafeteria looked like before the environment design changes were made (left) and after (right). The shaded boxes indicate areas where bottled water was available in each instance. Because the amount of water in the environment was increased, behavior shifted naturally and without additional motivation.

People often choose products not because of what they are, but because of where they are. If I walk into the kitchen and see a plate of cookies on the counter, I’ll pick up half a dozen and start eating, even if I hadn’t been thinking about them beforehand and didn’t necessarily feel hungry. If the communal table at the office is always filled with doughnuts and bagels, it’s going to be hard not to grab one every now and then. Your habits change depending on the room you are in and the cues in front of you.
Environment is the invisible hand that shapes human behavior.
Despite our unique personalities, certain behaviors tend to arise again and again under certain environmental conditions. In church, people tend to talk in whispers. On a dark street, people act wary and guarded. In this way, the most common form of change is not internal, but external: we are changed by the world around us. Every habit is context dependent.
In 1936, psychologist Kurt Lewin wrote a simple equation that makes a powerful statement: Behavior is a function of the Person in their Environment, or B = f (P,E).
 
It didn’t take long for Lewin’s Equation to be tested in business. In 1952, the economist Hawkins Stern described a phenomenon he called Suggestion Impulse Buying, which “is triggered when a shopper sees a product for the first time and visualizes a need for it.” In other words, customers will occasionally buy products not because they want them but because of how they are presented to them.
For example, items at eye level tend to be purchased more than those down near the floor. For this reason, you’ll find expensive brand names featured in easy-to-reach locations on store shelves because they drive the most profit, while cheaper alternatives are tucked away in harder-to-reach spots. The same goes for end caps, which are the units at the end of aisles. End caps are moneymaking machines for retailers because they are obvious locations that encounter a lot of foot traffic. For example, 45 percent of Coca-Cola sales come specifically from end-of-the-aisle racks.
The more obviously available a product or service is, the more likely you are to try it. People drink Bud Light because it is in every bar and visit Starbucks because it is on every corner. We like to think that we are in control. If we choose water over soda, we assume it is because we wanted to do so. The truth, however, is that many of the actions we take each day are shaped not by purposeful drive and choice but by the most obvious option.
Every living being has its own methods for sensing and understanding the world. Eagles have remarkable long-distance vision. Snakes can smell by “tasting the air” with their highly sensitive tongues. Sharks can detect small amounts of electricity and vibrations in the water caused by nearby fish. Even bacteria have chemoreceptors
—tiny sensory cells that allow them to detect toxic chemicals in their environment.
In humans, perception is directed by the sensory nervous system. We perceive the world through sight, sound, smell, touch, and taste. But we also have other ways of sensing stimuli. Some are conscious, but many are nonconscious. For instance, you can “notice” when the temperature drops before a storm, or when the pain in your gut rises during a stomachache, or when you fall off balance while walking on rocky ground. Receptors in your body pick up on a wide range of internal stimuli, such as the amount of salt in your blood or the need to drink when thirsty.
 
The most powerful of all human sensory abilities, however, is vision.
The human body has about eleven million sensory receptors. Approximately ten million of those are dedicated to sight. Some experts estimate that half of the brain’s resources are used on vision. Given that we are more dependent on vision than on any other sense, it should come as no surprise that visual cues are the greatest catalyst of our behavior. For this reason, a small change in what you see can lead to a big shift in what you do. As a result, you can imagine how important it is to live and work in environments that are filled with productive cues and devoid of unproductive ones.
Thankfully, there is good news in this respect. You don’t have to be the victim of your environment. You can also be the architect of it.

HOW TO DESIGN YOUR ENVIRONMENT FOR SUCCESS
During the energy crisis and oil embargo of the 1970s, Dutch researchers began to pay close attention to the country’s energy usage. In one suburb near Amsterdam, they found that some homeowners used 30 percent less energy than their neighbors—despite the homes being of similar size and getting electricity for the same price.
It turned out the houses in this neighborhood were nearly identical except for one feature: the location of the electrical meter. Some had one in the basement. Others had the electrical meter upstairs in the main hallway. As you may guess, the homes with the meters located in the main hallway used less electricity. When their energy use was obvious and easy to track, people changed their behavior.
Every habit is initiated by a cue, and we are more likely to notice cues that stand out. Unfortunately, the environments where we live and work often make it easy not to do certain actions because there is no obvious cue to trigger the behavior. It’s easy not to practice the guitar when it’s tucked away in the closet. It’s easy not to read a book when the bookshelf is in the corner of the guest room. It’s easy not to take your vitamins when they are out of sight in the pantry. When the cues that spark a habit are subtle or hidden, they are easy to ignore.
By comparison, creating obvious visual cues can draw your attention toward a desired habit. In the early 1990s, the cleaning staff at Schiphol Airport in Amsterdam installed a small sticker that looked like a fly near the center of each urinal. Apparently, when men stepped
 
up to the urinals, they aimed for what they thought was a bug. The stickers improved their aim and significantly reduced “spillage” around the urinals. Further analysis determined that the stickers cut bathroom cleaning costs by 8 percent per year.
I’ve experienced the power of obvious cues in my own life. I used to buy apples from the store, put them in the crisper in the bottom of the refrigerator, and forget all about them. By the time I remembered, the apples would have gone bad. I never saw them, so I never ate them.
Eventually, I took my own advice and redesigned my environment. I bought a large display bowl and placed it in the middle of the kitchen counter. The next time I bought apples, that was where they went—out in the open where I could see them. Almost like magic, I began eating a few apples each day simply because they were obvious rather than out of sight.
Here are a few ways you can redesign your environment and make the cues for your preferred habits more obvious:

  If you want to remember to take your medication each night, put your pill bottle directly next to the faucet on the bathroom counter.
  If you want to practice guitar more frequently, place your guitar stand in the middle of the living room.
  If you want to remember to send more thank-you notes, keep a stack of stationery on your desk.
  If you want to drink more water, fill up a few water bottles each morning and place them in common locations around the house.

If you want to make a habit a big part of your life, make the cue a big part of your environment. The most persistent behaviors usually have multiple cues. Consider how many different ways a smoker could be prompted to pull out a cigarette: driving in the car, seeing a friend smoke, feeling stressed at work, and so on.
The same strategy can be employed for good habits. By sprinkling triggers throughout your surroundings, you increase the odds that you’ll think about your habit throughout the day. Make sure the best choice is the most obvious one. Making a better decision is easy and natural when the cues for good habits are right in front of you.
 
Environment design is powerful not only because it influences how we engage with the world but also because we rarely do it. Most people live in a world others have created for them. But you can alter the spaces where you live and work to increase your exposure to positive cues and reduce your exposure to negative ones. Environment design allows you to take back control and become the architect of your life.
Be the designer of your world and not merely the consumer of it.

THE CONTEXT IS THE CUE
The cues that trigger a habit can start out very specific, but over time your habits become associated not with a single trigger but with the entire context surrounding the behavior.
For example, many people drink more in social situations than they would ever drink alone. The trigger is rarely a single cue, but rather the whole situation: watching your friends order drinks, hearing the music at the bar, seeing the beers on tap.
We mentally assign our habits to the locations in which they occur: the home, the office, the gym. Each location develops a connection to certain habits and routines. You establish a particular relationship with the objects on your desk, the items on your kitchen counter, the things in your bedroom.
Our behavior is not defined by the objects in the environment but by our relationship to them. In fact, this is a useful way to think about the influence of the environment on your behavior. Stop thinking about your environment as filled with objects. Start thinking about it as filled with relationships. Think in terms of how you interact with the spaces around you. For one person, her couch is the place where she reads for an hour each night. For someone else, the couch is where he watches television and eats a bowl of ice cream after work. Different people can have different memories—and thus different habits—associated with the same place.
The good news? You can train yourself to link a particular habit with a particular context.
In one study, scientists instructed insomniacs to get into bed only when they were tired. If they couldn’t fall asleep, they were told to sit in a different room until they became sleepy. Over time, subjects began
 
to associate the context of their bed with the action of sleeping, and it became easier to quickly fall asleep when they climbed in bed. Their brains learned that sleeping—not browsing on their phones, not watching television, not staring at the clock—was the only action that happened in that room.
The power of context also reveals an important strategy: habits can be easier to change in a new environment. It helps to escape the subtle triggers and cues that nudge you toward your current habits. Go to a new place—a different coffee shop, a bench in the park, a corner of your room you seldom use—and create a new routine there.
It is easier to associate a new habit with a new context than to build a new habit in the face of competing cues. It can be difficult to go to bed early if you watch television in your bedroom each night. It can be hard to study in the living room without getting distracted if that’s where you always play video games. But when you step outside your normal environment, you leave your behavioral biases behind. You aren’t battling old environmental cues, which allows new habits to form without interruption.
Want to think more creatively? Move to a bigger room, a rooftop patio, or a building with expansive architecture. Take a break from the space where you do your daily work, which is also linked to your current thought patterns.
Trying to eat healthier? It is likely that you shop on autopilot at your regular supermarket. Try a new grocery store. You may find it easier to avoid unhealthy food when your brain doesn’t automatically know where it is located in the store.
When you can’t manage to get to an entirely new environment, redefine or rearrange your current one. Create a separate space for work, study, exercise, entertainment, and cooking. The mantra I find useful is “One space, one use.”
When I started my career as an entrepreneur, I would often work from my couch or at the kitchen table. In the evenings, I found it very difficult to stop working. There was no clear division between the end of work time and the beginning of personal time. Was the kitchen table my office or the space where I ate meals? Was the couch where I relaxed or where I sent emails? Everything happened in the same place.
 
A few years later, I could finally afford to move to a home with a separate room for my office. Suddenly, work was something that happened “in here” and personal life was something that happened “out there.” It was easier for me to turn off the professional side of my brain when there was a clear dividing line between work life and home life. Each room had one primary use. The kitchen was for cooking. The office was for working.
Whenever possible, avoid mixing the context of one habit with another. When you start mixing contexts, you’ll start mixing habits— and the easier ones will usually win out. This is one reason why the versatility of modern technology is both a strength and a weakness.
You can use your phone for all sorts of tasks, which makes it a powerful device. But when you can use your phone to do nearly anything, it becomes hard to associate it with one task. You want to be productive, but you’re also conditioned to browse social media, check email, and play video games whenever you open your phone. It’s a mishmash of cues.
You may be thinking, “You don’t understand. I live in New York City. My apartment is the size of a smartphone. I need each room to play multiple roles.” Fair enough. If your space is limited, divide your room into activity zones: a chair for reading, a desk for writing, a table for eating. You can do the same with your digital spaces. I know a writer who uses his computer only for writing, his tablet only for reading, and his phone only for social media and texting. Every habit should have a home.
If you can manage to stick with this strategy, each context will become associated with a particular habit and mode of thought. Habits thrive under predictable circumstances like these. Focus comes automatically when you are sitting at your work desk. Relaxation is easier when you are in a space designed for that purpose. Sleep comes quickly when it is the only thing that happens in your bedroom. If you want behaviors that are stable and predictable, you need an environment that is stable and predictable.
A stable environment where everything has a place and a purpose is an environment where habits can easily form.

Chapter Summary
 
Small changes in context can lead to large changes in behavior over time.
Every habit is initiated by a cue. We are more likely to notice cues that stand out.
Make the cues of good habits obvious in your environment.
Gradually, your habits become associated not with a single trigger but with the entire context surrounding the behavior. The context becomes the cue.
It is easier to build new habits in a new environment because you are not fighting against old cues.
 

7
The Secret to Self-Control
N 1971, as the Vietnam War was heading into its sixteenth year, congressmen Robert Steele from Connecticut and Morgan Murphy
from Illinois made a discovery that stunned the American public. While visiting the troops, they had learned that over 15 percent of U.S. soldiers stationed there were heroin addicts. Follow-up research revealed that 35 percent of service members in Vietnam had tried heroin and as many as 20 percent were addicted—the problem was even worse than they had initially thought.
The discovery led to a flurry of activity in Washington, including the creation of the Special Action Office of Drug Abuse Prevention under President Nixon to promote prevention and rehabilitation and to track addicted service members when they returned home.
Lee Robins was one of the researchers in charge. In a finding that completely upended the accepted beliefs about addiction, Robins found that when soldiers who had been heroin users returned home, only 5 percent of them became re-addicted within a year, and just 12 percent relapsed within three years. In other words, approximately nine out of ten soldiers who used heroin in Vietnam eliminated their addiction nearly overnight.
This finding contradicted the prevailing view at the time, which considered heroin addiction to be a permanent and irreversible condition. Instead, Robins revealed that addictions could spontaneously dissolve if there was a radical change in the environment. In Vietnam, soldiers spent all day surrounded by cues triggering heroin use: it was easy to access, they were engulfed by the constant stress of war, they built friendships with fellow soldiers who
 
were also heroin users, and they were thousands of miles from home. Once a soldier returned to the United States, though, he found himself in an environment devoid of those triggers. When the context changed, so did the habit.
Compare this situation to that of a typical drug user. Someone becomes addicted at home or with friends, goes to a clinic to get clean
—which is devoid of all the environmental stimuli that prompt their habit—then returns to their old neighborhood with all of their previous cues that caused them to get addicted in the first place. It’s no wonder that usually you see numbers that are the exact opposite of those in the Vietnam study. Typically, 90 percent of heroin users become re- addicted once they return home from rehab.
The Vietnam studies ran counter to many of our cultural beliefs about bad habits because it challenged the conventional association of unhealthy behavior as a moral weakness. If you’re overweight, a smoker, or an addict, you’ve been told your entire life that it is because you lack self-control—maybe even that you’re a bad person. The idea that a little bit of discipline would solve all our problems is deeply embedded in our culture.
Recent research, however, shows something different. When scientists analyze people who appear to have tremendous self-control, it turns out those individuals aren’t all that different from those who are struggling. Instead, “disciplined” people are better at structuring their lives in a way that does not require heroic willpower and self- control. In other words, they spend less time in tempting situations.
The people with the best self-control are typically the ones who need to use it the least. It’s easier to practice self-restraint when you don’t have to use it very often. So, yes, perseverance, grit, and willpower are essential to success, but the way to improve these qualities is not by wishing you were a more disciplined person, but by creating a more disciplined environment.
This counterintuitive idea makes even more sense once you understand what happens when a habit is formed in the brain. A habit that has been encoded in the mind is ready to be used whenever the relevant situation arises. When Patty Olwell, a therapist from Austin, Texas, started smoking, she would often light up while riding horses with a friend. Eventually, she quit smoking and avoided it for years.
She had also stopped riding. Decades later, she hopped on a horse
 
again and found herself craving a cigarette for the first time in forever. The cues were still internalized; she just hadn’t been exposed to them in a long time.
Once a habit has been encoded, the urge to act follows whenever the environmental cues reappear. This is one reason behavior change techniques can backfire. Shaming obese people with weight-loss presentations can make them feel stressed, and as a result many people return to their favorite coping strategy: overeating. Showing pictures of blackened lungs to smokers leads to higher levels of anxiety, which drives many people to reach for a cigarette. If you’re not careful about cues, you can cause the very behavior you want to stop.
Bad habits are autocatalytic: the process feeds itself. They foster the feelings they try to numb. You feel bad, so you eat junk food. Because you eat junk food, you feel bad. Watching television makes you feel sluggish, so you watch more television because you don’t have the energy to do anything else. Worrying about your health makes you feel anxious, which causes you to smoke to ease your anxiety, which makes your health even worse and soon you’re feeling more anxious. It’s a downward spiral, a runaway train of bad habits.
Researchers refer to this phenomenon as “cue-induced wanting”: an external trigger causes a compulsive craving to repeat a bad habit.
Once you notice something, you begin to want it. This process is happening all the time—often without us realizing it. Scientists have found that showing addicts a picture of cocaine for just thirty-three milliseconds stimulates the reward pathway in the brain and sparks desire. This speed is too fast for the brain to consciously register—the addicts couldn’t even tell you what they had seen—but they craved the drug all the same.
Here’s the punch line: You can break a habit, but you’re unlikely to forget it. Once the mental grooves of habit have been carved into your brain, they are nearly impossible to remove entirely—even if they go unused for quite a while. And that means that simply resisting temptation is an ineffective strategy. It is hard to maintain a Zen attitude in a life filled with interruptions. It takes too much energy. In the short-run, you can choose to overpower temptation. In the long- run, we become a product of the environment that we live in. To put it bluntly, I have never seen someone consistently stick to positive habits in a negative environment.
 
A more reliable approach is to cut bad habits off at the source. One of the most practical ways to eliminate a bad habit is to reduce exposure to the cue that causes it.

  If you can’t seem to get any work done, leave your phone in another room for a few hours.
  If you’re continually feeling like you’re not enough, stop following social media accounts that trigger jealousy and envy.
  If you’re wasting too much time watching television, move the TV out of the bedroom.
  If you’re spending too much money on electronics, quit reading reviews of the latest tech gear.
  If you’re playing too many video games, unplug the console and put it in a closet after each use.

This practice is an inversion of the 1st Law of Behavior Change. Rather than make it obvious, you can make it invisible. I’m often surprised by how effective simple changes like these can be. Remove a single cue and the entire habit often fades away.
Self-control is a short-term strategy, not a long-term one. You may be able to resist temptation once or twice, but it’s unlikely you can muster the willpower to override your desires every time. Instead of summoning a new dose of willpower whenever you want to do the right thing, your energy would be better spent optimizing your environment. This is the secret to self-control. Make the cues of your good habits obvious and the cues of your bad habits invisible.

Chapter Summary
  The inversion of the 1st Law of Behavior Change is make it invisible.
  Once a habit is formed, it is unlikely to be forgotten.
  People with high self-control tend to spend less time in tempting situations. It’s easier to avoid temptation than resist it.
  One of the most practical ways to eliminate a bad habit is to reduce exposure to the cue that causes it.
  Self-control is a short-term strategy, not a long-term one.
 
HOW TO CREATE A GOOD HABIT


The 1st Law: Make It Obvious
1.1	: Fill out the Habits Scorecard. Write down your current habits to become aware of them.
1.2	: Use implementation intentions: “I will [BEHAVIOR] at [TIME] in [LOCATION].”
1.3	: Use habit stacking: “After [CURRENT HABIT], I will [NEW HABIT].”
1.4	: Design your environment. Make the cues of good habits obvious and visible.
The 2nd Law: Make It Attractive
The 3rd Law: Make It Easy
The 4th Law: Make It Satisfying

HOW TO BREAK A BAD HABIT


Inversion of the 1st Law: Make It Invisible
1.5: Reduce exposure. Remove the cues of your bad habits from your environment.
Inversion of the 2nd Law: Make It Unattractive
Inversion of the 3rd Law: Make It Difficult
Inversion of the 4th Law: Make It Unsatisfying

You can download a printable version of this habits cheat sheet at: atomichabits.com/cheatsheet
 


THE 2ND LAW

Make It Attractive
 

8
How to Make a Habit Irresistible
N THE 1940S, a Dutch scientist named Niko Tinbergen performed a series of experiments that transformed our understanding of what
motivates us. Tinbergen—who eventually won a Nobel Prize for his work—was investigating herring gulls, the gray and white birds often seen flying along the seashores of North America.
Adult herring gulls have a small red dot on their beak, and Tinbergen noticed that newly hatched chicks would peck this spot whenever they wanted food. To begin one experiment, he created a collection of fake cardboard beaks, just a head without a body. When the parents had flown away, he went over to the nest and offered these dummy beaks to the chicks. The beaks were obvious fakes, and he assumed the baby birds would reject them altogether.
However, when the tiny gulls saw the red spot on the cardboard beak, they pecked away just as if it were attached to their own mother. They had a clear preference for those red spots—as if they had been genetically programmed at birth. Soon Tinbergen discovered that the bigger the red spot, the faster the chicks pecked. Eventually, he created a beak with three large red dots on it. When he placed it over the nest, the baby birds went crazy with delight. They pecked at the little red patches as if it was the greatest beak they had ever seen.
Tinbergen and his colleagues discovered similar behavior in other animals. For example, the greylag goose is a ground-nesting bird.
Occasionally, as the mother moves around on the nest, one of the eggs will roll out and settle on the grass nearby. Whenever this happens, the goose will waddle over to the egg and use its beak and neck to pull it back into the nest.
 
Tinbergen discovered that the goose will pull any nearby round object, such as a billiard ball or a lightbulb, back into the nest. The bigger the object, the greater their response. One goose even made a tremendous effort to roll a volleyball back and sit on top. Like the baby gulls automatically pecking at red dots, the greylag goose was following an instinctive rule: When I see a round object nearby, I must roll it back into the nest. The bigger the round object, the harder I should try to get it.
It’s like the brain of each animal is preloaded with certain rules for behavior, and when it comes across an exaggerated version of that rule, it lights up like a Christmas tree. Scientists refer to these exaggerated cues as supernormal stimuli. A supernormal stimulus is a heightened version of reality—like a beak with three red dots or an egg the size of a volleyball—and it elicits a stronger response than usual.
Humans are also prone to fall for exaggerated versions of reality.
Junk food, for example, drives our reward systems into a frenzy. After spending hundreds of thousands of years hunting and foraging for food in the wild, the human brain has evolved to place a high value on salt, sugar, and fat. Such foods are often calorie-dense and they were quite rare when our ancient ancestors were roaming the savannah.
When you don’t know where your next meal is coming from, eating as much as possible is an excellent strategy for survival.
Today, however, we live in a calorie-rich environment. Food is abundant, but your brain continues to crave it like it is scarce. Placing a high value on salt, sugar, and fat is no longer advantageous to our health, but the craving persists because the brain’s reward centers have not changed for approximately fifty thousand years. The modern food industry relies on stretching our Paleolithic instincts beyond their evolutionary purpose.
A primary goal of food science is to create products that are more attractive to consumers. Nearly every food in a bag, box, or jar has been enhanced in some way, if only with additional flavoring.
Companies spend millions of dollars to discover the most satisfying level of crunch in a potato chip or the perfect amount of fizz in a soda. Entire departments are dedicated to optimizing how a product feels in your mouth—a quality known as orosensation. French fries, for example, are a potent combination—golden brown and crunchy on the outside, light and smooth on the inside.
 
Other processed foods enhance dynamic contrast, which refers to items with a combination of sensations, like crunchy and creamy.
Imagine the gooeyness of melted cheese on top of a crispy pizza crust, or the crunch of an Oreo cookie combined with its smooth center. With natural, unprocessed foods, you tend to experience the same sensations over and over—how’s that seventeenth bite of kale taste?
After a few minutes, your brain loses interest and you begin to feel full. But foods that are high in dynamic contrast keep the experience novel and interesting, encouraging you to eat more.
Ultimately, such strategies enable food scientists to find the “bliss point” for each product—the precise combination of salt, sugar, and fat that excites your brain and keeps you coming back for more. The result, of course, is that you overeat because hyperpalatable foods are more attractive to the human brain. As Stephan Guyenet, a neuroscientist who specializes in eating behavior and obesity, says, “We’ve gotten too good at pushing our own buttons.”
The modern food industry, and the overeating habits it has spawned, is just one example of the 2nd Law of Behavior Change: Make it attractive. The more attractive an opportunity is, the more likely it is to become habit-forming.
Look around. Society is filled with highly engineered versions of reality that are more attractive than the world our ancestors evolved in. Stores feature mannequins with exaggerated hips and breasts to sell clothes. Social media delivers more “likes” and praise in a few minutes than we could ever get in the office or at home. Online porn splices together stimulating scenes at a rate that would be impossible to replicate in real life. Advertisements are created with a combination of ideal lighting, professional makeup, and Photoshopped edits—even the model doesn’t look like the person in the final image. These are the supernormal stimuli of our modern world. They exaggerate features that are naturally attractive to us, and our instincts go wild as a result, driving us into excessive shopping habits, social media habits, porn habits, eating habits, and many others.
If history serves as a guide, the opportunities of the future will be more attractive than those of today. The trend is for rewards to become more concentrated and stimuli to become more enticing. Junk food is a more concentrated form of calories than natural foods. Hard liquor is a more concentrated form of alcohol than beer. Video games are a more
 
concentrated form of play than board games. Compared to nature, these pleasure-packed experiences are hard to resist. We have the brains of our ancestors but temptations they never had to face.
If you want to increase the odds that a behavior will occur, then you need to make it attractive. Throughout our discussion of the 2nd Law, our goal is to learn how to make our habits irresistible. While it is not possible to transform every habit into a supernormal stimulus, we can make any habit more enticing. To do this, we must start by understanding what a craving is and how it works.
We begin by examining a biological signature that all habits share— the dopamine spike.

THE DOPAMINE-DRIVEN FEEDBACK LOOP
Scientists can track the precise moment a craving occurs by measuring a neurotransmitter called dopamine.* The importance of dopamine became apparent in 1954 when the neuroscientists James Olds and Peter Milner ran an experiment that revealed the neurological processes behind craving and desire. By implanting electrodes in the brains of rats, the researchers blocked the release of dopamine. To the surprise of the scientists, the rats lost all will to live. They wouldn’t eat. They wouldn’t have sex. They didn’t crave anything. Within a few days, the animals died of thirst.
In follow-up studies, other scientists also inhibited the dopamine- releasing parts of the brain, but this time, they squirted little droplets of sugar into the mouths of the dopamine-depleted rats. Their little rat faces lit up with pleasurable grins from the tasty substance. Even though dopamine was blocked, they liked the sugar just as much as before; they just didn’t want it anymore. The ability to experience pleasure remained, but without dopamine, desire died. And without desire, action stopped.
When other researchers reversed this process and flooded the reward system of the brain with dopamine, animals performed habits at breakneck speed. In one study, mice received a powerful hit of dopamine each time they poked their nose in a box. Within minutes, the mice developed a craving so strong they began poking their nose into the box eight hundred times per hour. (Humans are not so
 
different: the average slot machine player will spin the wheel six hundred times per hour.)
Habits are a dopamine-driven feedback loop. Every behavior that is highly habit-forming—taking drugs, eating junk food, playing video games, browsing social media—is associated with higher levels of dopamine. The same can be said for our most basic habitual behaviors like eating food, drinking water, having sex, and interacting socially.
For years, scientists assumed dopamine was all about pleasure, but now we know it plays a central role in many neurological processes, including motivation, learning and memory, punishment and aversion, and voluntary movement.
When it comes to habits, the key takeaway is this: dopamine is released not only when you experience pleasure, but also when you anticipate it. Gambling addicts have a dopamine spike right before they place a bet, not after they win. Cocaine addicts get a surge of dopamine when they see the powder, not after they take it. Whenever you predict that an opportunity will be rewarding, your levels of dopamine spike in anticipation. And whenever dopamine rises, so does your motivation to act.
It is the anticipation of a reward—not the fulfillment of it—that gets us to take action.
Interestingly, the reward system that is activated in the brain when you receive a reward is the same system that is activated when you anticipate a reward. This is one reason the anticipation of an experience can often feel better than the attainment of it. As a child, thinking about Christmas morning can be better than opening the gifts. As an adult, daydreaming about an upcoming vacation can be more enjoyable than actually being on vacation. Scientists refer to this as the difference between “wanting” and “liking.”

THE DOPAMINE SPIKE
 

FIGURE 9: Before a habit is learned (A), dopamine is released when the reward is experienced for the first time. The next time around (B), dopamine rises before taking action, immediately after a cue is recognized. This spike leads to a feeling of desire and a craving to take action whenever the cue is spotted. Once a habit is learned, dopamine will not rise when a reward is experienced because you already expect the reward. However, if you see a cue and expect a reward, but do not get one, then dopamine will drop in disappointment (C). The sensitivity of the dopamine response can clearly be seen when a reward is provided late (D). First, the cue is identified and dopamine rises as a craving builds. Next, a response is taken but the reward does not come as quickly as expected and dopamine begins to drop. Finally, when the reward comes a little later than you had hoped, dopamine spikes again. It is as if the brain is saying, “See! I knew I was right. Don’t forget to repeat this action next time.”
 
Your brain has far more neural circuitry allocated for wanting rewards than for liking them. The wanting centers in the brain are large: the brain stem, the nucleus accumbens, the ventral tegmental area, the dorsal striatum, the amygdala, and portions of the prefrontal cortex. By comparison, the liking centers of the brain are much smaller. They are often referred to as “hedonic hot spots” and are distributed like tiny islands throughout the brain. For instance, researchers have found that 100 percent of the nucleus accumbens is activated during wanting. Meanwhile, only 10 percent of the structure is activated during liking.
The fact that the brain allocates so much precious space to the regions responsible for craving and desire provides further evidence of the crucial role these processes play. Desire is the engine that drives behavior. Every action is taken because of the anticipation that precedes it. It is the craving that leads to the response.
These insights reveal the importance of the 2nd Law of Behavior Change. We need to make our habits attractive because it is the expectation of a rewarding experience that motivates us to act in the first place. This is where a strategy known as temptation bundling comes into play.

HOW TO USE TEMPTATION BUNDLING TO MAKE YOUR HABITS MORE ATTRACTIVE
Ronan Byrne, an electrical engineering student in Dublin, Ireland, enjoyed watching Netflix, but he also knew that he should exercise more often than he did. Putting his engineering skills to use, Byrne hacked his stationary bike and connected it to his laptop and television. Then he wrote a computer program that would allow Netflix to run only if he was cycling at a certain speed. If he slowed down for too long, whatever show he was watching would pause until he started pedaling again. He was, in the words of one fan, “eliminating obesity one Netflix binge at a time.”
He was also employing temptation bundling to make his exercise habit more attractive. Temptation bundling works by linking an action you want to do with an action you need to do. In Byrne’s case, he bundled watching Netflix (the thing he wanted to do) with riding his stationary bike (the thing he needed to do).
 
Businesses are masters at temptation bundling. For instance, when the American Broadcasting Company, more commonly known as ABC, launched its Thursday-night television lineup for the 2014–2015 season, they promoted temptation bundling on a massive scale.
Every Thursday, the company would air three shows created by screenwriter Shonda Rhimes—Grey’s Anatomy, Scandal, and How to Get Away with Murder. They branded it as “TGIT on ABC” (TGIT stands for Thank God It’s Thursday). In addition to promoting the shows, ABC encouraged viewers to make popcorn, drink red wine, and enjoy the evening.
Andrew Kubitz, head of scheduling for ABC, described the idea behind the campaign: “We see Thursday night as a viewership opportunity, with either couples or women by themselves who want to sit down and escape and have fun and drink their red wine and have some popcorn.” The brilliance of this strategy is that ABC was associating the thing they needed viewers to do (watch their shows) with activities their viewers already wanted to do (relax, drink wine, and eat popcorn).
Over time, people began to connect watching ABC with feeling relaxed and entertained. If you drink red wine and eat popcorn at 8
p.m. every Thursday, then eventually “8 p.m. on Thursday” means relaxation and entertainment. The reward gets associated with the cue, and the habit of turning on the television becomes more attractive.
You’re more likely to find a behavior attractive if you get to do one of your favorite things at the same time. Perhaps you want to hear about the latest celebrity gossip, but you need to get in shape. Using temptation bundling, you could only read the tabloids and watch reality shows at the gym. Maybe you want to get a pedicure, but you need to clean out your email inbox. Solution: only get a pedicure while processing overdue work emails.
Temptation bundling is one way to apply a psychology theory known as Premack’s Principle. Named after the work of professor David Premack, the principle states that “more probable behaviors will reinforce less probable behaviors.” In other words, even if you don’t really want to process overdue work emails, you’ll become conditioned to do it if it means you get to do something you really want to do along the way.
 
You can even combine temptation bundling with the habit stacking strategy we discussed in Chapter 5 to create a set of rules to guide your behavior.
The habit stacking + temptation bundling formula is:

1.	After [CURRENT HABIT], I will [HABIT I NEED].
2.	After [HABIT I NEED], I will [HABIT I WANT].

If you want to read the news, but you need to express more gratitude:

1.	After I get my morning coffee, I will say one thing I’m grateful for that happened yesterday (need).
2.	After I say one thing I’m grateful for, I will read the news (want).

If you want to watch sports, but you need to make sales calls:

1.	After I get back from my lunch break, I will call three potential clients (need).
2.	After I call three potential clients, I will check ESPN (want).

If you want to check Facebook, but you need to exercise more:

1.	After I pull out my phone, I will do ten burpees (need).
2.	After I do ten burpees, I will check Facebook (want).

The hope is that eventually you’ll look forward to calling three clients or doing ten burpees because it means you get to read the latest sports news or check Facebook. Doing the thing you need to do means you get to do the thing you want to do.
We began this chapter by discussing supernormal stimuli, which are heightened versions of reality that increase our desire to take action.
Temptation bundling is one way to create a heightened version of any habit by connecting it with something you already want. Engineering a truly irresistible habit is a hard task, but this simple strategy can be
 
employed to make nearly any habit more attractive than it would be otherwise.

Chapter Summary
The 2nd Law of Behavior Change is make it attractive.
The more attractive an opportunity is, the more likely it is to become habit-forming.
Habits are a dopamine-driven feedback loop. When dopamine rises, so does our motivation to act.
It is the anticipation of a reward—not the fulfillment of it—that gets us to take action. The greater the anticipation, the greater the dopamine spike.
Temptation bundling is one way to make your habits more attractive. The strategy is to pair an action you want to do with an action you need to do.
 

9
The Role of Family and Friends in Shaping Your Habits
N 1965, a Hungarian man named Laszlo Polgar wrote a series of strange letters to a woman named Klara.
Laszlo was a firm believer in hard work. In fact, it was all he believed in: he completely rejected the idea of innate talent. He claimed that with deliberate practice and the development of good habits, a child could become a genius in any field. His mantra was “A genius is not born, but is educated and trained.”
Laszlo believed in this idea so strongly that he wanted to test it with his own children—and he was writing to Klara because he “needed a wife willing to jump on board.” Klara was a teacher and, although she may not have been as adamant as Laszlo, she also believed that with proper instruction, anyone could advance their skills.
Laszlo decided chess would be a suitable field for the experiment, and he laid out a plan to raise his children to become chess prodigies. The kids would be home-schooled, a rarity in Hungary at the time. The house would be filled with chess books and pictures of famous chess players. The children would play against each other constantly and compete in the best tournaments they could find. The family would keep a meticulous file system of the tournament history of every competitor the children faced. Their lives would be dedicated to chess.
Laszlo successfully courted Klara, and within a few years, the Polgars were parents to three young girls: Susan, Sofia, and Judit.
Susan, the oldest, began playing chess when she was four years old.
Within six months, she was defeating adults.
 
Sofia, the middle child, did even better. By fourteen, she was a world champion, and a few years later, she became a grandmaster.
Judit, the youngest, was the best of all. By age five, she could beat her father. At twelve, she was the youngest player ever listed among the top one hundred chess players in the world. At fifteen years and four months old, she became the youngest grandmaster of all time— younger than Bobby Fischer, the previous record holder. For twenty- seven years, she was the number-one-ranked female chess player in the world.
The childhood of the Polgar sisters was atypical, to say the least.
And yet, if you ask them about it, they claim their lifestyle was attractive, even enjoyable. In interviews, the sisters talk about their childhood as entertaining rather than grueling. They loved playing chess. They couldn’t get enough of it. Once, Laszlo reportedly found Sofia playing chess in the bathroom in the middle of the night.
Encouraging her to go back to sleep, he said, “Sofia, leave the pieces alone!” To which she replied, “Daddy, they won’t leave me alone!”
The Polgar sisters grew up in a culture that prioritized chess above all else—praised them for it, rewarded them for it. In their world, an obsession with chess was normal. And as we are about to see, whatever habits are normal in your culture are among the most attractive behaviors you’ll find.

THE SEDUCTIVE PULL OF SOCIAL NORMS
Humans are herd animals. We want to fit in, to bond with others, and to earn the respect and approval of our peers. Such inclinations are essential to our survival. For most of our evolutionary history, our ancestors lived in tribes. Becoming separated from the tribe—or worse, being cast out—was a death sentence. “The lone wolf dies, but the pack survives.”*
Meanwhile, those who collaborated and bonded with others enjoyed increased safety, mating opportunities, and access to resources. As Charles Darwin noted, “In the long history of humankind, those who learned to collaborate and improvise most effectively have prevailed.” As a result, one of the deepest human desires is to belong. And this ancient preference exerts a powerful influence on our modern behavior.
 
We don’t choose our earliest habits, we imitate them. We follow the script handed down by our friends and family, our church or school, our local community and society at large. Each of these cultures and groups comes with its own set of expectations and standards—when and whether to get married, how many children to have, which holidays to celebrate, how much money to spend on your child’s birthday party. In many ways, these social norms are the invisible rules that guide your behavior each day. You’re always keeping them in mind, even if they are at the not top of your mind. Often, you follow the habits of your culture without thinking, without questioning, and sometimes without remembering. As the French philosopher Michel de Montaigne wrote, “The customs and practices of life in society sweep us along.”
Most of the time, going along with the group does not feel like a burden. Everyone wants to belong. If you grow up in a family that rewards you for your chess skills, playing chess will seem like a very attractive thing to do. If you work in a job where everyone wears expensive suits, then you’ll be inclined to splurge on one as well. If all of your friends are sharing an inside joke or using a new phrase, you’ll want to do it, too, so they know that you “get it.” Behaviors are attractive when they help us fit in.
We imitate the habits of three groups in particular:

1.	The close.
2.	The many.
3.	The powerful.

Each group offers an opportunity to leverage the 2nd Law of Behavior Change and make our habits more attractive.

1.	Imitating the Close
Proximity has a powerful effect on our behavior. This is true of the physical environment, as we discussed in Chapter 6, but it is also true of the social environment.
We pick up habits from the people around us. We copy the way our parents handle arguments, the way our peers flirt with one another,
 
the way our coworkers get results. When your friends smoke pot, you give it a try, too. When your wife has a habit of double-checking that the door is locked before going to bed, you pick it up as well.
I find that I often imitate the behavior of those around me without realizing it. In conversation, I’ll automatically assume the body posture of the other person. In college, I began to talk like my roommates.
When traveling to other countries, I unconsciously imitate the local accent despite reminding myself to stop.
As a general rule, the closer we are to someone, the more likely we are to imitate some of their habits. One groundbreaking study tracked twelve thousand people for thirty-two years and found that “a person’s chances of becoming obese increased by 57 percent if he or she had a friend who became obese.” It works the other way, too. Another study found that if one person in a relationship lost weight, the other partner would also slim down about one third of the time. Our friends and family provide a sort of invisible peer pressure that pulls us in their direction.
Of course, peer pressure is bad only if you’re surrounded by bad influences. When astronaut Mike Massimino was a graduate student at MIT, he took a small robotics class. Of the ten people in the class, four became astronauts. If your goal was to make it into space, then that room was about the best culture you could ask for. Similarly, one study found that the higher your best friend’s IQ at age eleven or twelve, the higher your IQ would be at age fifteen, even after controlling for natural levels of intelligence. We soak up the qualities and practices of those around us.
One of the most effective things you can do to build better habits is to join a culture where your desired behavior is the normal behavior. New habits seem achievable when you see others doing them every day. If you are surrounded by fit people, you’re more likely to consider working out to be a common habit. If you’re surrounded by jazz lovers, you’re more likely to believe it’s reasonable to play jazz every day. Your culture sets your expectation for what is “normal.” Surround yourself with people who have the habits you want to have yourself. You’ll rise together.
To make your habits even more attractive, you can take this strategy one step further.
 
Join a culture where (1) your desired behavior is the normal behavior and (2) you already have something in common with the group. Steve Kamb, an entrepreneur in New York City, runs a company called Nerd Fitness, which “helps nerds, misfits, and mutants lose weight, get strong, and get healthy.” His clients include video game lovers, movie fanatics, and average Joes who want to get in shape.
Many people feel out of place the first time they go to the gym or try to change their diet, but if you are already similar to the other members of the group in some way—say, your mutual love of Star Wars—change becomes more appealing because it feels like something people like you already do.
Nothing sustains motivation better than belonging to the tribe. It transforms a personal quest into a shared one. Previously, you were on your own. Your identity was singular. You are a reader. You are a musician. You are an athlete. When you join a book club or a band or a cycling group, your identity becomes linked to those around you.
Growth and change is no longer an individual pursuit. We are readers. We are musicians. We are cyclists. The shared identity begins to reinforce your personal identity. This is why remaining part of a group after achieving a goal is crucial to maintaining your habits. It’s friendship and community that embed a new identity and help behaviors last over the long run.

2.	Imitating the Many
In the 1950s, psychologist Solomon Asch conducted a series of experiments that are now taught to legions of undergrads each year. To begin each experiment, the subject entered the room with a group of strangers. Unbeknownst to them, the other participants were actors planted by the researcher and instructed to deliver scripted answers to certain questions.
The group would be shown one card with a line on it and then a second card with a series of lines. Each person was asked to select the line on the second card that was similar in length to the line on the first card. It was a very simple task. Here is an example of two cards used in the experiment:

CONFORMING TO SOCIAL NORMS
 

FIGURE 10: This is a representation of two cards used by Solomon Asch in his famous social conformity experiments. The length of the line on the first card (left) is obviously the same as line C, but when a group of actors claimed it was a different length the research subjects would often change their minds and go with the crowd rather than believe their own eyes.

The experiment always began the same. First, there would be some easy trials where everyone agreed on the correct line. After a few rounds, the participants were shown a test that was just as obvious as the previous ones, except the actors in the room would select an intentionally incorrect answer. For example, they would respond “A” to the comparison shown in Figure 10. Everyone would agree that the lines were the same even though they were clearly different.
The subject, who was unaware of the ruse, would immediately become bewildered. Their eyes would open wide. They would laugh nervously to themselves. They would double-check the reactions of other participants. Their agitation would grow as one person after another delivered the same incorrect response. Soon, the subject began to doubt their own eyes. Eventually, they delivered the answer they knew in their heart to be incorrect.
 
Asch ran this experiment many times and in many different ways. What he discovered was that as the number of actors increased, so did the conformity of the subject. If it was just the subject and one actor, then there was no effect on the person’s choice. They just assumed they were in the room with a dummy. When two actors were in the room with the subject, there was still little impact. But as the number of people increased to three actors and four and all the way to eight, the subject became more likely to second-guess themselves. By the end of the experiment, nearly 75 percent of the subjects had agreed with the group answer even though it was obviously incorrect.
Whenever we are unsure how to act, we look to the group to guide our behavior. We are constantly scanning our environment and wondering, “What is everyone else doing?” We check reviews on Amazon or Yelp or TripAdvisor because we want to imitate the “best” buying, eating, and travel habits. It’s usually a smart strategy. There is evidence in numbers.
But there can be a downside.
The normal behavior of the tribe often overpowers the desired behavior of the individual. For example, one study found that when a chimpanzee learns an effective way to crack nuts open as a member of one group and then switches to a new group that uses a less effective strategy, it will avoid using the superior nut cracking method just to blend in with the rest of the chimps.
Humans are similar. There is tremendous internal pressure to comply with the norms of the group. The reward of being accepted is often greater than the reward of winning an argument, looking smart, or finding truth. Most days, we’d rather be wrong with the crowd than be right by ourselves.
The human mind knows how to get along with others. It wants to get along with others. This is our natural mode. You can override it— you can choose to ignore the group or to stop caring what other people think—but it takes work. Running against the grain of your culture requires extra effort.
When changing your habits means challenging the tribe, change is unattractive. When changing your habits means fitting in with the tribe, change is very attractive.
 
3.	Imitating the Powerful
Humans everywhere pursue power, prestige, and status. We want pins and medallions on our jackets. We want President or Partner in our titles. We want to be acknowledged, recognized, and praised. This tendency can seem vain, but overall, it’s a smart move. Historically, a person with greater power and status has access to more resources, worries less about survival, and proves to be a more attractive mate.
We are drawn to behaviors that earn us respect, approval, admiration, and status. We want to be the one in the gym who can do muscle-ups or the musician who can play the hardest chord progressions or the parent with the most accomplished children because these things separate us from the crowd. Once we fit in, we start looking for ways to stand out.
This is one reason we care so much about the habits of highly effective people. We try to copy the behavior of successful people because we desire success ourselves. Many of our daily habits are imitations of people we admire. You replicate the marketing strategies of the most successful firms in your industry. You make a recipe from your favorite baker. You borrow the storytelling strategies of your favorite writer. You mimic the communication style of your boss. We imitate people we envy.
High-status people enjoy the approval, respect, and praise of others.
And that means if a behavior can get us approval, respect, and praise, we find it attractive.
We are also motivated to avoid behaviors that would lower our status. We trim our hedges and mow our lawn because we don’t want to be the slob of the neighborhood. When our mother comes to visit, we clean up the house because we don’t want to be judged. We are continually wondering “What will others think of me?” and altering our behavior based on the answer.
The Polgar sisters—the chess prodigies mentioned at the beginning of this chapter—are evidence of the powerful and lasting impact social influences can have on our behavior. The sisters practiced chess for many hours each day and continued this remarkable effort for decades. But these habits and behaviors maintained their attractiveness, in part, because they were valued by their culture. From the praise of their
 
parents to the achievement of different status markers like becoming a grandmaster, they had many reasons to continue their effort.

Chapter Summary
  The culture we live in determines which behaviors are attractive to us.
  We tend to adopt habits that are praised and approved of by our culture because we have a strong desire to fit in and belong to the tribe.
  We tend to imitate the habits of three social groups: the close (family and friends), the many (the tribe), and the powerful (those with status and prestige).
  One of the most effective things you can do to build better habits is to join a culture where (1) your desired behavior is the normal behavior and (2) you already have something in common with the group.
  The normal behavior of the tribe often overpowers the desired behavior of the individual. Most days, we’d rather be wrong with the crowd than be right by ourselves.
  If a behavior can get us approval, respect, and praise, we find it attractive.
 

10
How to Find and Fix the Causes of Your Bad Habits
N LATE 2012, I was sitting in an old apartment just a few blocks from Istanbul’s most famous street, Istiklal Caddesi. I was in the middle of
a four-day trip to Turkey and my guide, Mike, was relaxing in a worn- out armchair a few feet away.
Mike wasn’t really a guide. He was just a guy from Maine who had been living in Turkey for five years, but he offered to show me around while I was visiting the country and I took him up on it. On this particular night, I had been invited to dinner with him and a handful of his Turkish friends.
There were seven of us, and I was the only one who hadn’t, at some point, smoked at least one pack of cigarettes per day. I asked one of the Turks how he got started. “Friends,” he said. “It always starts with your friends. One friend smokes, then you try it.”
What was truly fascinating was that half of the people in the room had managed to quit smoking. Mike had been smoke-free for a few years at that point, and he swore up and down that he broke the habit because of a book called Allen Carr’s Easy Way to Stop Smoking.
“It frees you from the mental burden of smoking,” he said. “It tells you: ‘Stop lying to yourself. You know you don’t actually want to smoke. You know you don’t really enjoy this.’ It helps you feel like you’re not the victim anymore. You start to realize that you don’t need to smoke.”
I had never tried a cigarette, but I took a look at the book afterward out of curiosity. The author employs an interesting strategy to help
 
smokers eliminate their cravings. He systematically reframes each cue associated with smoking and gives it a new meaning.
He says things like:

  You think you are quitting something, but you’re not quitting anything because cigarettes do nothing for you.
  You think smoking is something you need to do to be social, but it’s not. You can be social without smoking at all.
  You think smoking is about relieving stress, but it’s not. Smoking does not relieve your nerves, it destroys them.

Over and over, he repeats these phrases and others like them. “Get it clearly into your mind,” he says. “You are losing nothing and you are making marvelous positive gains not only in health, energy and money but also in confidence, self-respect, freedom and, most important of all, in the length and quality of your future life.”
By the time you get to the end of the book, smoking seems like the most ridiculous thing in the world to do. And if you no longer expect smoking to bring you any benefits, you have no reason to smoke. It is an inversion of the 2nd Law of Behavior Change: make it unattractive.
Now, I know this idea might sound overly simplistic. Just change your mind and you can quit smoking. But stick with me for a minute.

WHERE CRAVINGS COME FROM
Every behavior has a surface level craving and a deeper, underlying motive. I often have a craving that goes something like this: “I want to eat tacos.” If you were to ask me why I want to eat tacos, I wouldn’t say, “Because I need food to survive.” But the truth is, somewhere deep down, I am motivated to eat tacos because I have to eat to survive. The underlying motive is to obtain food and water even if my specific craving is for a taco.
Some of our underlying motives include:*

Conserve energy Obtain food and water
 
  Find love and reproduce
  Connect and bond with others
  Win social acceptance and approval   Reduce uncertainty
  Achieve status and prestige

A craving is just a specific manifestation of a deeper underlying motive. Your brain did not evolve with a desire to smoke cigarettes or to check Instagram or to play video games. At a deep level, you simply want to reduce uncertainty and relieve anxiety, to win social acceptance and approval, or to achieve status.
Look at nearly any product that is habit-forming and you’ll see that it does not create a new motivation, but rather latches onto the underlying motives of human nature.

  Find love and reproduce = using Tinder
  Connect and bond with others = browsing Facebook
  Win social acceptance and approval = posting on Instagram   Reduce uncertainty = searching on Google
  Achieve status and prestige = playing video games

Your habits are modern-day solutions to ancient desires. New versions of old vices. The underlying motives behind human behavior remain the same. The specific habits we perform differ based on the period of history.
Here’s the powerful part: there are many different ways to address the same underlying motive. One person might learn to reduce stress by smoking a cigarette. Another person learns to ease their anxiety by going for a run. Your current habits are not necessarily the best way to solve the problems you face; they are just the methods you learned to use. Once you associate a solution with the problem you need to solve, you keep coming back to it.
Habits are all about associations. These associations determine whether we predict a habit to be worth repeating or not. As we covered in our discussion of the 1st Law, your brain is continually absorbing
 
information and noticing cues in the environment. Every time you perceive a cue, your brain runs a simulation and makes a prediction about what to do in the next moment.
Cue: You notice that the stove is hot.
Prediction: If I touch it I’ll get burned, so I should avoid touching it.
Cue: You see that the traffic light turned green.
Prediction: If I step on the gas, I’ll make it safely through the intersection and get closer to my destination, so I should step on the gas.
You see a cue, categorize it based on past experience, and determine the appropriate response.
This all happens in an instant, but it plays a crucial role in your habits because every action is preceded by a prediction. Life feels reactive, but it is actually predictive. All day long, you are making your best guess of how to act given what you’ve just seen and what has worked for you in the past. You are endlessly predicting what will happen in the next moment.
Our behavior is heavily dependent on these predictions. Put another way, our behavior is heavily dependent on how we interpret the events that happen to us, not necessarily the objective reality of the events themselves. Two people can look at the same cigarette, and one feels the urge to smoke while the other is repulsed by the smell. The same cue can spark a good habit or a bad habit depending on your prediction. The cause of your habits is actually the prediction that precedes them.
These predictions lead to feelings, which is how we typically describe a craving—a feeling, a desire, an urge. Feelings and emotions transform the cues we perceive and the predictions we make into a signal that we can apply. They help explain what we are currently sensing. For instance, whether or not you realize it, you are noticing how warm or cold you feel right now. If the temperature drops by one degree, you probably won’t do anything. If the temperature drops ten degrees, however, you’ll feel cold and put on another layer of clothing. Feeling cold was the signal that prompted you to act. You have been sensing the cues the entire time, but it is only when you predict that you would be better off in a different state that you take action.
 
A craving is the sense that something is missing. It is the desire to change your internal state. When the temperature falls, there is a gap between what your body is currently sensing and what it wants to be sensing. This gap between your current state and your desired state provides a reason to act.
Desire is the difference between where you are now and where you want to be in the future. Even the tiniest action is tinged with the motivation to feel differently than you do in the moment. When you binge-eat or light up or browse social media, what you really want is not a potato chip or a cigarette or a bunch of likes. What you really want is to feel different.
Our feelings and emotions tell us whether to hold steady in our current state or to make a change. They help us decide the best course of action. Neurologists have discovered that when emotions and feelings are impaired, we actually lose the ability to make decisions.
We have no signal of what to pursue and what to avoid. As the neuroscientist Antonio Damasio explains, “It is emotion that allows you to mark things as good, bad, or indifferent.”
To summarize, the specific cravings you feel and habits you perform are really an attempt to address your fundamental underlying motives. Whenever a habit successfully addresses a motive, you develop a craving to do it again. In time, you learn to predict that checking social media will help you feel loved or that watching YouTube will allow you to forget your fears. Habits are attractive when we associate them with positive feelings, and we can use this insight to our advantage rather than to our detriment.

HOW TO REPROGRAM YOUR BRAIN TO ENJOY HARD HABITS
You can make hard habits more attractive if you can learn to associate them with a positive experience. Sometimes, all you need is a slight mind-set shift. For instance, we often talk about everything we have to do in a given day. You have to wake up early for work. You have to make another sales call for your business. You have to cook dinner for your family.
Now, imagine changing just one word: You don’t “have” to. You “get” to.
 
You get to wake up early for work. You get to make another sales call for your business. You get to cook dinner for your family. By simply changing one word, you shift the way you view each event. You transition from seeing these behaviors as burdens and turn them into opportunities.
The key point is that both versions of reality are true. You have to do those things, and you also get to do them. We can find evidence for whatever mind-set we choose.
I once heard a story about a man who uses a wheelchair. When asked if it was difficult being confined, he responded, “I’m not confined to my wheelchair—I am liberated by it. If it wasn’t for my wheelchair, I would be bed-bound and never able to leave my house.” This shift in perspective completely transformed how he lived each day.
Reframing your habits to highlight their benefits rather than their drawbacks is a fast and lightweight way to reprogram your mind and make a habit seem more attractive.
Exercise. Many people associate exercise with being a challenging task that drains energy and wears you down. You can just as easily view it as a way to develop skills and build you up. Instead of telling yourself “I need to go run in the morning,” say “It’s time to build endurance and get fast.”
Finance. Saving money is often associated with sacrifice. However, you can associate it with freedom rather than limitation if you realize one simple truth: living below your current means increases your future means. The money you save this month increases your purchasing power next month.
Meditation. Anyone who has tried meditation for more than three seconds knows how frustrating it can be when the next distraction inevitably pops into your mind. You can transform frustration into delight when you realize that each interruption gives you a chance to practice returning to your breath. Distraction is a good thing because you need distractions to practice meditation.
Pregame jitters. Many people feel anxious before delivering a big presentation or competing in an important event. They experience quicker breathing, a faster heart rate, heightened arousal. If we interpret these feelings negatively, then we feel threatened and tense up. If we interpret these feelings positively, then we can respond with
 
fluidity and grace. You can reframe “I am nervous” to “I am excited and I’m getting an adrenaline rush to help me concentrate.”
These little mind-set shifts aren’t magic, but they can help change the feelings you associate with a particular habit or situation.
If you want to take it a step further, you can create a motivation ritual. You simply practice associating your habits with something you enjoy, then you can use that cue whenever you need a bit of motivation. For instance, if you always play the same song before having sex, then you’ll begin to link the music with the act. Whenever you want to get in the mood, just press play.
Ed Latimore, a boxer and writer from Pittsburgh, benefited from a similar strategy without knowing it. “Odd realization,” he wrote. “My focus and concentration goes up just by putting my headphones [on] while writing. I don’t even have to play any music.” Without realizing it, he was conditioning himself. In the beginning, he put his headphones on, played some music he enjoyed, and did focused work. After doing it five, ten, twenty times, putting his headphones on became a cue that he automatically associated with increased focus.
The craving followed naturally.
Athletes use similar strategies to get themselves in the mind-set to perform. During my baseball career, I developed a specific ritual of stretching and throwing before each game. The whole sequence took about ten minutes, and I did it the same way every single time. While it physically warmed me up to play, more importantly, it put me in the right mental state. I began to associate my pregame ritual with feeling competitive and focused. Even if I wasn’t motivated beforehand, by the time I was done with my ritual, I was in “game mode.”
You can adapt this strategy for nearly any purpose. Say you want to feel happier in general. Find something that makes you truly happy— like petting your dog or taking a bubble bath—and then create a short routine that you perform every time before you do the thing you love. Maybe you take three deep breaths and smile.
Three deep breaths. Smile. Pet the dog. Repeat.
Eventually, you’ll begin to associate this breathe-and-smile routine with being in a good mood. It becomes a cue that means feeling happy. Once established, you can break it out anytime you need to change your emotional state. Stressed at work? Take three deep breaths and
 
smile. Sad about life? Three deep breaths and smile. Once a habit has been built, the cue can prompt a craving, even if it has little to do with the original situation.
The key to finding and fixing the causes of your bad habits is to reframe the associations you have about them. It’s not easy, but if you can reprogram your predictions, you can transform a hard habit into an attractive one.

Chapter Summary
The inversion of the 2nd Law of Behavior Change is make it unattractive.
Every behavior has a surface level craving and a deeper underlying motive.
Your habits are modern-day solutions to ancient desires.
The cause of your habits is actually the prediction that precedes them. The prediction leads to a feeling.
Highlight the benefits of avoiding a bad habit to make it seem unattractive.
Habits are attractive when we associate them with positive feelings and unattractive when we associate them with negative feelings. Create a motivation ritual by doing something you enjoy immediately before a difficult habit.

HOW TO CREATE A GOOD HABIT


The 1st Law: Make It Obvious
1.1	: Fill out the Habits Scorecard. Write down your current habits to become aware of them.
1.2	: Use implementation intentions: “I will [BEHAVIOR] at [TIME] in [LOCATION].”
1.3	: Use habit stacking: “After [CURRENT HABIT], I will [NEW HABIT].”
1.4	: Design your environment. Make the cues of good habits obvious and visible.
The 2nd Law: Make It Attractive
2.1	: Use temptation bundling. Pair an action you want to do with an action you need to do.
2.2	: Join a culture where your desired behavior is the normal behavior.
2.3	: Create a motivation ritual. Do something you enjoy immediately before a difficult habit.
The 3rd Law: Make It Easy

The 4th Law: Make It Satisfying

HOW TO BREAK A BAD HABIT
 


Inversion of the 1st Law: Make It Invisible
1.5: Reduce exposure. Remove the cues of your bad habits from your environment.
Inversion of the 2nd Law: Make It Unattractive
2.4: Reframe your mind-set. Highlight the benefits of avoiding your bad habits.
Inversion of the 3rd Law: Make It Difficult

Inversion of the 4th Law: Make It Unsatisfying

You can download a printable version of this habits cheat sheet at: atomichabits.com/cheatsheet 
11
Walk Slowly, but Never Backward
N THE FIRST day of class, Jerry Uelsmann, a professor at the University of Florida, divided his film photography students into
two groups.
Everyone on the left side of the classroom, he explained, would be in the “quantity” group. They would be graded solely on the amount of work they produced. On the final day of class, he would tally the number of photos submitted by each student. One hundred photos would rate an A, ninety photos a B, eighty photos a C, and so on.
Meanwhile, everyone on the right side of the room would be in the “quality” group. They would be graded only on the excellence of their work. They would only need to produce one photo during the semester, but to get an A, it had to be a nearly perfect image.
At the end of the term, he was surprised to find that all the best photos were produced by the quantity group. During the semester, these students were busy taking photos, experimenting with composition and lighting, testing out various methods in the darkroom, and learning from their mistakes. In the process of creating hundreds of photos, they honed their skills. Meanwhile, the quality group sat around speculating about perfection. In the end, they had little to show for their efforts other than unverified theories and one mediocre photo.*
It is easy to get bogged down trying to find the optimal plan for change: the fastest way to lose weight, the best program to build muscle, the perfect idea for a side hustle. We are so focused on figuring out the best approach that we never get around to taking action. As Voltaire once wrote, “The best is the enemy of the good.”
 
I refer to this as the difference between being in motion and taking action. The two ideas sound similar, but they’re not the same. When you’re in motion, you’re planning and strategizing and learning. Those are all good things, but they don’t produce a result.
Action, on the other hand, is the type of behavior that will deliver an outcome. If I outline twenty ideas for articles I want to write, that’s motion. If I actually sit down and write an article, that’s action. If I search for a better diet plan and read a few books on the topic, that’s motion. If I actually eat a healthy meal, that’s action.
Sometimes motion is useful, but it will never produce an outcome by itself. It doesn’t matter how many times you go talk to the personal trainer, that motion will never get you in shape. Only the action of working out will get the result you’re looking to achieve.
If motion doesn’t lead to results, why do we do it? Sometimes we do it because we actually need to plan or learn more. But more often than not, we do it because motion allows us to feel like we’re making progress without running the risk of failure. Most of us are experts at avoiding criticism. It doesn’t feel good to fail or to be judged publicly, so we tend to avoid situations where that might happen. And that’s the biggest reason why you slip into motion rather than taking action: you want to delay failure.
It’s easy to be in motion and convince yourself that you’re still making progress. You think, “I’ve got conversations going with four potential clients right now. This is good. We’re moving in the right direction.” Or, “I brainstormed some ideas for that book I want to write. This is coming together.”
Motion makes you feel like you’re getting things done. But really, you’re just preparing to get something done. When preparation becomes a form of procrastination, you need to change something. You don’t want to merely be planning. You want to be practicing.
If you want to master a habit, the key is to start with repetition, not perfection. You don’t need to map out every feature of a new habit. You just need to practice it. This is the first takeaway of the 3rd Law: you just need to get your reps in.

HOW LONG DOES IT ACTUALLY TAKE TO FORM A NEW HABIT?
 
Habit formation is the process by which a behavior becomes progressively more automatic through repetition. The more you repeat an activity, the more the structure of your brain changes to become efficient at that activity. Neuroscientists call this long-term potentiation, which refers to the strengthening of connections between neurons in the brain based on recent patterns of activity. With each repetition, cell-to-cell signaling improves and the neural connections tighten. First described by neuropsychologist Donald Hebb in 1949, this phenomenon is commonly known as Hebb’s Law: “Neurons that fire together wire together.”
Repeating a habit leads to clear physical changes in the brain. In musicians, the cerebellum—critical for physical movements like plucking a guitar string or pulling a violin bow—is larger than it is in nonmusicians. Mathematicians, meanwhile, have increased gray matter in the inferior parietal lobule, which plays a key role in computation and calculation. Its size is directly correlated with the amount of time spent in the field; the older and more experienced the mathematician, the greater the increase in gray matter.
When scientists analyzed the brains of taxi drivers in London, they found that the hippocampus—a region of the brain involved in spatial memory—was significantly larger in their subjects than in non–taxi drivers. Even more fascinating, the hippocampus decreased in size when a driver retired. Like the muscles of the body responding to regular weight training, particular regions of the brain adapt as they are used and atrophy as they are abandoned.
Of course, the importance of repetition in establishing habits was recognized long before neuroscientists began poking around. In 1860, the English philosopher George H. Lewes noted, “In learning to speak a new language, to play on a musical instrument, or to perform unaccustomed movements, great difficulty is felt, because the channels through which each sensation has to pass have not become established; but no sooner has frequent repetition cut a pathway, than this difficulty vanishes; the actions become so automatic that they can be performed while the mind is otherwise engaged.” Both common sense and scientific evidence agree: repetition is a form of change.
Each time you repeat an action, you are activating a particular neural circuit associated with that habit. This means that simply putting in your reps is one of the most critical steps you can take to
 
encoding a new habit. It is why the students who took tons of photos improved their skills while those who merely theorized about perfect photos did not. One group engaged in active practice, the other in passive learning. One in action, the other in motion.
All habits follow a similar trajectory from effortful practice to automatic behavior, a process known as automaticity. Automaticity is the ability to perform a behavior without thinking about each step, which occurs when the nonconscious mind takes over.
It looks something like this:

THE HABIT LINE

FIGURE 11: In the beginning (point A), a habit requires a good deal of effort and concentration to perform. After a few repetitions (point B), it gets easier, but still requires some conscious attention. With enough practice (point C), the habit becomes more automatic than conscious. Beyond this threshold
—the habit line—the behavior can be done more or less without thinking. A new habit has been formed.

On the following page, you’ll see what it looks like when researchers track the level of automaticity for an actual habit like walking for ten minutes each day. The shape of these charts, which scientists call
 
learning curves, reveals an important truth about behavior change: habits form based on frequency, not time.

WALKING 10 MINUTES PER DAY
FIGURE 12: This graph shows someone who built the habit of walking for ten minutes after breakfast each day. Notice that as the repetitions increase, so does automaticity, until the behavior is as easy and automatic as it can be.

One of the most common questions I hear is, “How long does it take to build a new habit?” But what people really should be asking is, “How many does it take to form a new habit?” That is, how many repetitions are required to make a habit automatic?
There is nothing magical about time passing with regard to habit formation. It doesn’t matter if it’s been twenty-one days or thirty days or three hundred days. What matters is the rate at which you perform the behavior. You could do something twice in thirty days, or two hundred times. It’s the frequency that makes the difference. Your current habits have been internalized over the course of hundreds, if not thousands, of repetitions. New habits require the same level of frequency. You need to string together enough successful attempts until the behavior is firmly embedded in your mind and you cross the Habit Line.
 
In practice, it doesn’t really matter how long it takes for a habit to become automatic. What matters is that you take the actions you need to take to make progress. Whether an action is fully automatic is of less importance.
To build a habit, you need to practice it. And the most effective way to make practice happen is to adhere to the 3rd Law of Behavior Change: make it easy. The chapters that follow will show you how to do exactly that.

Chapter Summary
The 3rd Law of Behavior Change is make it easy.
The most effective form of learning is practice, not planning. Focus on taking action, not being in motion.
Habit formation is the process by which a behavior becomes progressively more automatic through repetition.
The amount of time you have been performing a habit is not as important as the number of times you have performed it.
 

12
The Law of Least Effort
N HIS AWARD-WINNING BOOK, Guns, Germs, and Steel, anthropologist and biologist Jared Diamond points out a simple fact: different
continents have different shapes. At first glance, this statement seems rather obvious and unimportant, but it turns out to have a profound impact on human behavior.
The primary axis of the Americas runs from north to south. That is, the landmass of North and South America tends to be tall and thin rather than wide and fat. The same is generally true for Africa.
Meanwhile, the landmass that makes up Europe, Asia, and the Middle East is the opposite. This massive stretch of land tends to be more east- west in shape. According to Diamond, this difference in shape played a significant role in the spread of agriculture over the centuries.
When agriculture began to spread around the globe, farmers had an easier time expanding along east-west routes than along north-south ones. This is because locations along the same latitude generally share similar climates, amounts of sunlight and rainfall, and changes in season. These factors allowed farmers in Europe and Asia to domesticate a few crops and grow them along the entire stretch of land from France to China.

THE SHAPE OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR
 

FIGURE 13: The primary axis of Europe and Asia is east-west. The primary axis of the Americas and Africa is north-south. This leads to a wider range of climates up-and-down the Americas than across Europe and Asia. As a result, agriculture spread nearly twice as fast across Europe and Asia than it did elsewhere. The behavior of farmers—even across hundreds or thousands of years—was constrained by the amount of friction in the environment.

By comparison, the climate varies greatly when traveling from north to south. Just imagine how different the weather is in Florida compared to Canada. You can be the most talented farmer in the world, but it won’t help you grow Florida oranges in the Canadian winter. Snow is a poor substitute for soil. In order to spread crops along north-south routes, farmers would need to find and domesticate new plants whenever the climate changed.
As a result, agriculture spread two to three times faster across Asia and Europe than it did up and down the Americas. Over the span of centuries, this small difference had a very big impact. Increased food production allowed for more rapid population growth. With more people, these cultures were able to build stronger armies and were better equipped to develop new technologies. The changes started out
 
small—a crop that spread slightly farther, a population that grew slightly faster—but compounded into substantial differences over time.
The spread of agriculture provides an example of the 3rd Law of Behavior Change on a global scale. Conventional wisdom holds that motivation is the key to habit change. Maybe if you really wanted it, you’d actually do it. But the truth is, our real motivation is to be lazy and to do what is convenient. And despite what the latest productivity best seller will tell you, this is a smart strategy, not a dumb one.
Energy is precious, and the brain is wired to conserve it whenever possible. It is human nature to follow the Law of Least Effort, which states that when deciding between two similar options, people will naturally gravitate toward the option that requires the least amount of work.* For example, expanding your farm to the east where you can grow the same crops rather than heading north where the climate is different. Out of all the possible actions we could take, the one that is realized is the one that delivers the most value for the least effort. We are motivated to do what is easy.
Every action requires a certain amount of energy. The more energy required, the less likely it is to occur. If your goal is to do a hundred push-ups per day, that’s a lot of energy! In the beginning, when you’re motivated and excited, you can muster the strength to get started. But after a few days, such a massive effort feels exhausting. Meanwhile, sticking to the habit of doing one push-up per day requires almost no energy to get started. And the less energy a habit requires, the more likely it is to occur.
Look at any behavior that fills up much of your life and you’ll see that it can be performed with very low levels of motivation. Habits like scrolling on our phones, checking email, and watching television steal so much of our time because they can be performed almost without effort. They are remarkably convenient.
In a sense, every habit is just an obstacle to getting what you really want. Dieting is an obstacle to getting fit. Meditation is an obstacle to feeling calm. Journaling is an obstacle to thinking clearly. You don’t actually want the habit itself. What you really want is the outcome the habit delivers. The greater the obstacle—that is, the more difficult the habit—the more friction there is between you and your desired end state. This is why it is crucial to make your habits so easy that you’ll do
 
them even when you don’t feel like it. If you can make your good habits more convenient, you’ll be more likely to follow through on them.
But what about all the moments when we seem to do the opposite? If we’re all so lazy, then how do you explain people accomplishing hard things like raising a child or starting a business or climbing Mount Everest?
Certainly, you are capable of doing very hard things. The problem is that some days you feel like doing the hard work and some days you feel like giving in. On the tough days, it’s crucial to have as many things working in your favor as possible so that you can overcome the challenges life naturally throws your way. The less friction you face, the easier it is for your stronger self to emerge. The idea behind make it easy is not to only do easy things. The idea is to make it as easy as possible in the moment to do things that payoff in the long run.

HOW TO ACHIEVE MORE WITH LESS EFFORT
Imagine you are holding a garden hose that is bent in the middle. Some water can flow through, but not very much. If you want to increase the rate at which water passes through the hose, you have two options. The first option is to crank up the valve and force more water out. The second option is to simply remove the bend in the hose and let water flow through naturally.
Trying to pump up your motivation to stick with a hard habit is like trying to force water through a bent hose. You can do it, but it requires a lot of effort and increases the tension in your life. Meanwhile, making your habits simple and easy is like removing the bend in the hose.
Rather than trying to overcome the friction in your life, you reduce it.
One of the most effective ways to reduce the friction associated with your habits is to practice environment design. In Chapter 6, we discussed environment design as a method for making cues more obvious, but you can also optimize your environment to make actions easier. For example, when deciding where to practice a new habit, it is best to choose a place that is already along the path of your daily routine. Habits are easier to build when they fit into the flow of your life. You are more likely to go to the gym if it is on your way to work because stopping doesn’t add much friction to your lifestyle. By
 
comparison, if the gym is off the path of your normal commute—even by just a few blocks—now you’re going “out of your way” to get there.
Perhaps even more effective is reducing the friction within your home or office. Too often, we try to start habits in high-friction environments. We try to follow a strict diet while we are out to dinner with friends. We try to write a book in a chaotic household. We try to concentrate while using a smartphone filled with distractions. It doesn’t have to be this way. We can remove the points of friction that hold us back. This is precisely what electronics manufacturers in Japan began to do in the 1970s.
In an article published in the New Yorker titled “Better All the Time,” James Suroweicki writes:
“Japanese firms emphasized what came to be known as ‘lean production,’ relentlessly looking to remove waste of all kinds from the production process, down to redesigning workspaces, so workers didn’t have to waste time twisting and turning to reach their tools. The result was that Japanese factories were more efficient and Japanese products were more reliable than American ones. In 1974, service calls for American-made color televisions were five times as common as for Japanese televisions. By 1979, it took American workers three times as long to assemble their sets.”
I like to refer to this strategy as addition by subtraction.* The Japanese companies looked for every point of friction in the manufacturing process and eliminated it. As they subtracted wasted effort, they added customers and revenue. Similarly, when we remove the points of friction that sap our time and energy, we can achieve more with less effort. (This is one reason tidying up can feel so good: we are simultaneously moving forward and lightening the cognitive load our environment places on us.)
If you look at the most habit-forming products, you’ll notice that one of the things these goods and services do best is remove little bits of friction from your life. Meal delivery services reduce the friction of shopping for groceries. Dating apps reduce the friction of making social introductions. Ride-sharing services reduce the friction of getting across town. Text messaging reduces the friction of sending a letter in the mail.
 
Like a Japanese television manufacturer redesigning their workspace to reduce wasted motion, successful companies design their products to automate, eliminate, or simplify as many steps as possible. They reduce the number of fields on each form. They pare down the number of clicks required to create an account. They deliver their products with easy-to-understand directions or ask their customers to make fewer choices.
When the first voice-activated speakers were released—products like Google Home, Amazon Echo, and Apple HomePod—I asked a friend what he liked about the product he had purchased. He said it was just easier to say “Play some country music” than to pull out his phone, open the music app, and pick a playlist. Of course, just a few years earlier, having unlimited access to music in your pocket was a remarkably frictionless behavior compared to driving to the store and buying a CD. Business is a never-ending quest to deliver the same result in an easier fashion.
Similar strategies have been used effectively by governments. When the British government wanted to increase tax collection rates, they switched from sending citizens to a web page where the tax form could be downloaded to linking directly to the form. Reducing that one step in the process increased the response rate from 19.2 percent to 23.4 percent. For a country like the United Kingdom, those percentage points represent millions in tax revenue.
The central idea is to create an environment where doing the right thing is as easy as possible. Much of the battle of building better habits comes down to finding ways to reduce the friction associated with our good habits and increase the friction associated with our bad ones.

PRIME THE ENVIRONMENT FOR FUTURE USE
Oswald Nuckols is an IT developer from Natchez, Mississippi. He is also someone who understands the power of priming his environment.
Nuckols dialed in his cleaning habits by following a strategy he refers to as “resetting the room.” For instance, when he finishes watching television, he places the remote back on the TV stand, arranges the pillows on the couch, and folds the blanket. When he leaves his car, he throws any trash away. Whenever he takes a shower, he wipes down the toilet while the shower is warming up. (As he notes,
 
the “perfect time to clean the toilet is right before you wash yourself in the shower anyway.”) The purpose of resetting each room is not simply to clean up after the last action, but to prepare for the next action.
“When I walk into a room everything is in its right place,” Nuckols wrote. “Because I do this every day in every room, stuff always stays in good shape	People think I work hard but I’m actually really lazy.
I’m just proactively lazy. It gives you so much time back.”
Whenever you organize a space for its intended purpose, you are priming it to make the next action easy. For instance, my wife keeps a box of greeting cards that are presorted by occasion—birthday, sympathy, wedding, graduation, and more. Whenever necessary, she grabs an appropriate card and sends it off. She is incredibly good at remembering to send cards because she has reduced the friction of doing so. For years, I was the opposite. Someone would have a baby and I would think, “I should send a card.” But then weeks would pass and by the time I remembered to pick one up at the store, it was too late. The habit wasn’t easy.
There are many ways to prime your environment so it’s ready for immediate use. If you want to cook a healthy breakfast, place the skillet on the stove, set the cooking spray on the counter, and lay out any plates and utensils you’ll need the night before. When you wake up, making breakfast will be easy.

  Want to draw more? Put your pencils, pens, notebooks, and drawing tools on top of your desk, within easy reach.
  Want to exercise? Set out your workout clothes, shoes, gym bag, and water bottle ahead of time.
  Want to improve your diet? Chop up a ton of fruits and vegetables on weekends and pack them in containers, so you have easy access to healthy, ready-to-eat options during the week.

These are simple ways to make the good habit the path of least resistance.
You can also invert this principle and prime the environment to make bad behaviors difficult. If you find yourself watching too much television, for example, then unplug it after each use. Only plug it back
 
in if you can say out loud the name of the show you want to watch. This setup creates just enough friction to prevent mindless viewing.
If that doesn’t do it, you can take it a step further. Unplug the television and take the batteries out of the remote after each use, so it takes an extra ten seconds to turn it back on. And if you’re really hard- core, move the television out of the living room and into a closet after each use. You can be sure you’ll only take it out when you really want to watch something. The greater the friction, the less likely the habit.
Whenever possible, I leave my phone in a different room until lunch. When it’s right next to me, I’ll check it all morning for no reason at all. But when it is in another room, I rarely think about it. And the friction is high enough that I won’t go get it without a reason. As a result, I get three to four hours each morning when I can work without interruption.
If sticking your phone in another room doesn’t seem like enough, tell a friend or family member to hide it from you for a few hours. Ask a coworker to keep it at their desk in the morning and give it back to you at lunch.
It is remarkable how little friction is required to prevent unwanted behavior. When I hide beer in the back of the fridge where I can’t see it, I drink less. When I delete social media apps from my phone, it can be weeks before I download them again and log in. These tricks are unlikely to curb a true addiction, but for many of us, a little bit of friction can be the difference between sticking with a good habit or sliding into a bad one. Imagine the cumulative impact of making dozens of these changes and living in an environment designed to make the good behaviors easier and the bad behaviors harder.
Whether we are approaching behavior change as an individual, a parent, a coach, or a leader, we should ask ourselves the same question: “How can we design a world where it’s easy to do what’s right?” Redesign your life so the actions that matter most are also the actions that are easiest to do.

Chapter Summary
  Human behavior follows the Law of Least Effort. We will naturally gravitate toward the option that requires the least amount of work.
 
Create an environment where doing the right thing is as easy as possible.
Reduce the friction associated with good behaviors. When friction is low, habits are easy.
Increase the friction associated with bad behaviors. When friction is high, habits are difficult.
Prime your environment to make future actions easier.
 

13
How to Stop Procrastinating by Using the Two-Minute Rule
WYLA THARP IS widely regarded as one of the greatest dancers and choreographers of the modern era. In 1992, she was awarded a
MacArthur Fellowship, often referred to as the Genius Grant, and she has spent the bulk of her career touring the globe to perform her original works. She also credits much of her success to simple daily habits.
“I begin each day of my life with a ritual,” she writes. “I wake up at 5:30 A.M., put on my workout clothes, my leg warmers, my sweat shirt, and my hat. I walk outside my Manhattan home, hail a taxi, and tell the driver to take me to the Pumping Iron gym at 91st Street and First Avenue, where I work out for two hours.
“The ritual is not the stretching and weight training I put my body through each morning at the gym; the ritual is the cab. The moment I tell the driver where to go I have completed the ritual.
“It’s a simple act, but doing it the same way each morning habitualizes it—makes it repeatable, easy to do. It reduces the chance that I would skip it or do it differently. It is one more item in my arsenal of routines, and one less thing to think about.”
Hailing a cab each morning may be a tiny action, but it is a splendid example of the 3rd Law of Behavior Change.
Researchers estimate that 40 to 50 percent of our actions on any given day are done out of habit. This is already a substantial percentage, but the true influence of your habits is even greater than these numbers suggest. Habits are automatic choices that influence the
 
conscious decisions that follow. Yes, a habit can be completed in just a few seconds, but it can also shape the actions that you take for minutes or hours afterward.
Habits are like the entrance ramp to a highway. They lead you down a path and, before you know it, you’re speeding toward the next behavior. It seems to be easier to continue what you are already doing than to start doing something different. You sit through a bad movie for two hours. You keep snacking even when you’re already full. You check your phone for “just a second” and soon you have spent twenty minutes staring at the screen. In this way, the habits you follow without thinking often determine the choices you make when you are thinking.
Each evening, there is a tiny moment—usually around 5:15 p.m.— that shapes the rest of my night. My wife walks in the door from work and either we change into our workout clothes and head to the gym or we crash onto the couch, order Indian food, and watch The Office.* Similar to Twyla Tharp hailing the cab, the ritual is changing into my workout clothes. If I change clothes, I know the workout will happen. Everything that follows—driving to the gym, deciding which exercises to do, stepping under the bar—is easy once I’ve taken the first step.
Every day, there are a handful of moments that deliver an outsized impact. I refer to these little choices as decisive moments. The moment you decide between ordering takeout or cooking dinner. The moment you choose between driving your car or riding your bike. The moment you decide between starting your homework or grabbing the video game controller. These choices are a fork in the road.

DECISIVE MOMENTS
 


FIGURE 14: The difference between a good day and a bad day is often a few productive and healthy choices made at decisive moments. Each one is like a fork in the road, and these choices stack up throughout the day and can ultimately lead to very different outcomes.

Decisive moments set the options available to your future self. For instance, walking into a restaurant is a decisive moment because it determines what you’ll be eating for lunch. Technically, you are in control of what you order, but in a larger sense, you can only order an item if it is on the menu. If you walk into a steakhouse, you can get a sirloin or a rib eye, but not sushi. Your options are constrained by what’s available. They are shaped by the first choice.
We are limited by where our habits lead us. This is why mastering the decisive moments throughout your day is so important. Each day is made up of many moments, but it is really a few habitual choices that determine the path you take. These little choices stack up, each one setting the trajectory for how you spend the next chunk of time.
 
Habits are the entry point, not the end point. They are the cab, not the gym.

THE TWO-MINUTE RULE
Even when you know you should start small, it’s easy to start too big. When you dream about making a change, excitement inevitably takes over and you end up trying to do too much too soon. The most effective way I know to counteract this tendency is to use the Two-Minute Rule, which states, “When you start a new habit, it should take less than two minutes to do.”
You’ll find that nearly any habit can be scaled down into a two- minute version:

  “Read before bed each night” becomes “Read one page.”
  “Do thirty minutes of yoga” becomes “Take out my yoga mat.”   “Study for class” becomes “Open my notes.”
  “Fold the laundry” becomes “Fold one pair of socks.”   “Run three miles” becomes “Tie my running shoes.”
The idea is to make your habits as easy as possible to start. Anyone can meditate for one minute, read one page, or put one item of clothing away. And, as we have just discussed, this is a powerful strategy because once you’ve started doing the right thing, it is much easier to continue doing it. A new habit should not feel like a challenge. The actions that follow can be challenging, but the first two minutes should be easy. What you want is a “gateway habit” that naturally leads you down a more productive path.
You can usually figure out the gateway habits that will lead to your desired outcome by mapping out your goals on a scale from “very easy” to “very hard.” For instance, running a marathon is very hard. Running a 5K is hard. Walking ten thousand steps is moderately difficult.
Walking ten minutes is easy. And putting on your running shoes is very easy. Your goal might be to run a marathon, but your gateway habit is to put on your running shoes. That’s how you follow the Two-Minute Rule.

 
Very easy	Easy	Moderate	Hard	Very hard
Put on your running shoes	Walk ten minutes	Walk ten thousand steps	
Run a 5K	Run a marathon

Write one sentence	Write one paragraph	Write one thousand words	Write a five-thousand- word article	Write a book

Open your notes	Study for ten minutes	Study for three hours	
Get straight A’s	
Earn a PhD
People often think it’s weird to get hyped about reading one page or meditating for one minute or making one sales call. But the point is not to do one thing. The point is to master the habit of showing up. The truth is, a habit must be established before it can be improved. If you can’t learn the basic skill of showing up, then you have little hope of mastering the finer details. Instead of trying to engineer a perfect habit from the start, do the easy thing on a more consistent basis. You have to standardize before you can optimize.
As you master the art of showing up, the first two minutes simply become a ritual at the beginning of a larger routine. This is not merely a hack to make habits easier but actually the ideal way to master a difficult skill. The more you ritualize the beginning of a process, the more likely it becomes that you can slip into the state of deep focus that is required to do great things. By doing the same warm-up before every workout, you make it easier to get into a state of peak performance. By following the same creative ritual, you make it easier to get into the hard work of creating. By developing a consistent
power-down habit, you make it easier to get to bed at a reasonable time each night. You may not be able to automate the whole process, but you can make the first action mindless. Make it easy to start and the rest will follow.
The Two-Minute Rule can seem like a trick to some people. You know that the real goal is to do more than just two minutes, so it may feel like you’re trying to fool yourself. Nobody is actually aspiring to read one page or do one push-up or open their notes. And if you know it’s a mental trick, why would you fall for it?
If the Two-Minute Rule feels forced, try this: do it for two minutes and then stop. Go for a run, but you must stop after two minutes. Start meditating, but you must stop after two minutes. Study Arabic, but you
 
must stop after two minutes. It’s not a strategy for starting, it’s the whole thing. Your habit can only last one hundred and twenty seconds.
One of my readers used this strategy to lose over one hundred pounds. In the beginning, he went to the gym each day, but he told himself he wasn’t allowed to stay for more than five minutes. He would go to the gym, exercise for five minutes, and leave as soon as his time was up. After a few weeks, he looked around and thought, “Well, I’m always coming here anyway. I might as well start staying a little longer.” A few years later, the weight was gone.
Journaling provides another example. Nearly everyone can benefit from getting their thoughts out of their head and onto paper, but most people give up after a few days or avoid it entirely because journaling feels like a chore.* The secret is to always stay below the point where it feels like work. Greg McKeown, a leadership consultant from the United Kingdom, built a daily journaling habit by specifically writing less than he felt like. He always stopped journaling before it seemed like a hassle. Ernest Hemingway believed in similar advice for any kind of writing. “The best way is to always stop when you are going good,” he said.
Strategies like this work for another reason, too: they reinforce the identity you want to build. If you show up at the gym five days in a row
—even if it’s just for two minutes—you are casting votes for your new identity. You’re not worried about getting in shape. You’re focused on becoming the type of person who doesn’t miss workouts. You’re taking the smallest action that confirms the type of person you want to be.
We rarely think about change this way because everyone is consumed by the end goal. But one push-up is better than not exercising. One minute of guitar practice is better than none at all. One minute of reading is better than never picking up a book. It’s better to do less than you hoped than to do nothing at all.
At some point, once you’ve established the habit and you’re showing up each day, you can combine the Two-Minute Rule with a technique we call habit shaping to scale your habit back up toward your ultimate goal. Start by mastering the first two minutes of the smallest version of the behavior. Then, advance to an intermediate step and repeat the process—focusing on just the first two minutes and mastering that stage before moving on to the next level. Eventually, you’ll end up with
 
the habit you had originally hoped to build while still keeping your focus where it should be: on the first two minutes of the behavior.
EXAMPLES OF HABIT SHAPING


Becoming an Early Riser
Phase 1: Be home by 10 p.m. every night.
Phase 2: Have all devices (TV, phone, etc.) turned off by 10 p.m. every night.
Phase 3: Be in bed by 10 p.m. every night (reading a book, talking with your partner).
Phase 4: Lights off by 10 p.m. every night.
Phase 5: Wake up at 6 a.m. every day.


Becoming Vegan
Phase 1: Start eating vegetables at each meal.
Phase 2: Stop eating animals with four legs (cow, pig, lamb, etc.). Phase 3: Stop eating animals with two legs (chicken, turkey, etc.). Phase 4: Stop eating animals with no legs (fish, clams, scallops, etc.).
Phase 5: Stop eating all animal products (eggs, milk, cheese).


Starting to Exercise
Phase 1: Change into workout clothes.
Phase 2: Step out the door (try taking a walk).
Phase 3: Drive to the gym, exercise for five minutes, and leave.
Phase 4: Exercise for fifteen minutes at least once per week.
Phase 5: Exercise three times per week.
Nearly any larger life goal can be transformed into a two-minute behavior. I want to live a healthy and long life > I need to stay in shape
> I need to exercise > I need to change into my workout clothes. I want to have a happy marriage > I need to be a good partner > I should do something each day to make my partner’s life easier > I should meal plan for next week.
Whenever you are struggling to stick with a habit, you can employ the Two-Minute Rule. It’s a simple way to make your habits easy.

Chapter Summary
  Habits can be completed in a few seconds but continue to impact your behavior for minutes or hours afterward.
  Many habits occur at decisive moments—choices that are like a fork in the road—and either send you in the direction of a
 
productive day or an unproductive one.
The Two-Minute Rule states, “When you start a new habit, it should take less than two minutes to do.”
The more you ritualize the beginning of a process, the more likely it becomes that you can slip into the state of deep focus that is required to do great things.
Standardize before you optimize. You can’t improve a habit that doesn’t exist.
 

14
How to Make Good Habits Inevitable and Bad Habits Impossible
N THE SUMMER OF 1830, Victor Hugo was facing an impossible deadline.
Twelve months earlier, the French author had promised his publisher a new book. But instead of writing, he spent that year pursuing other projects, entertaining guests, and delaying his work. Frustrated, Hugo’s publisher responded by setting a deadline less than six months away. The book had to be finished by February 1831.
Hugo concocted a strange plan to beat his procrastination. He collected all of his clothes and asked an assistant to lock them away in a large chest. He was left with nothing to wear except a large shawl.
Lacking any suitable clothing to go outdoors, he remained in his study and wrote furiously during the fall and winter of 1830. The Hunchback of Notre Dame was published two weeks early on January 14, 1831.*
Sometimes success is less about making good habits easy and more about making bad habits hard. This is an inversion of the 3rd Law of Behavior Change: make it difficult. If you find yourself continually struggling to follow through on your plans, then you can take a page from Victor Hugo and make your bad habits more difficult by creating what psychologists call a commitment device.
A commitment device is a choice you make in the present that controls your actions in the future. It is a way to lock in future behavior, bind you to good habits, and restrict you from bad ones. When Victor Hugo shut his clothes away so he could focus on writing, he was creating a commitment device.*
 
There are many ways to create a commitment device. You can reduce overeating by purchasing food in individual packages rather than in bulk size. You can voluntarily ask to be added to the banned list at casinos and online poker sites to prevent future gambling sprees.
I’ve even heard of athletes who have to “make weight” for a competition choosing to leave their wallets at home during the week before weigh-in so they won’t be tempted to buy fast food.
As another example, my friend and fellow habits expert Nir Eyal purchased an outlet timer, which is an adapter that he plugged in between his internet router and the power outlet. At 10 p.m. each night, the outlet timer cuts off the power to the router. When the internet goes off, everyone knows it is time to go to bed.
Commitment devices are useful because they enable you to take advantage of good intentions before you can fall victim to temptation. Whenever I’m looking to cut calories, for example, I will ask the waiter to split my meal and box half of it to go before the meal is served. If I waited until the meal came out and told myself “I’ll just eat half,” it would never work.
The key is to change the task such that it requires more work to get out of the good habit than to get started on it. If you’re feeling motivated to get in shape, schedule a yoga session and pay ahead of time. If you’re excited about the business you want to start, email an entrepreneur you respect and set up a consulting call. When the time comes to act, the only way to bail is to cancel the meeting, which requires effort and may cost money.
Commitment devices increase the odds that you’ll do the right thing in the future by making bad habits difficult in the present. However, we can do even better. We can make good habits inevitable and bad habits impossible.

HOW TO AUTOMATE A HABIT AND NEVER THINK ABOUT IT AGAIN
John Henry Patterson was born in Dayton, Ohio, in 1844. He spent his childhood doing chores on the family farm and working shifts at his father’s sawmill. After attending college at Dartmouth, Patterson returned to Ohio and opened a small supply store for coal miners.
 
It seemed like a good opportunity. The store faced little competition and enjoyed a steady stream of customers, but still struggled to make money. That was when Patterson discovered his employees were stealing from him.
In the mid-1800s, employee theft was a common problem. Receipts were kept in an open drawer and could easily be altered or discarded. There were no video cameras to review behavior and no software to track transactions. Unless you were willing to hover over your employees every minute of the day, or to manage all transactions yourself, it was difficult to prevent theft.
As Patterson mulled over his predicament, he came across an advertisement for a new invention called Ritty’s Incorruptible Cashier. Designed by fellow Dayton resident James Ritty, it was the first cash register. The machine automatically locked the cash and receipts inside after each transaction. Patterson bought two for fifty dollars each.
Employee theft at his store vanished overnight. In the next six months, Patterson’s business went from losing money to making
$5,000 in profit—the equivalent of more than $100,000 today.
Patterson was so impressed with the machine that he changed businesses. He bought the rights to Ritty’s invention and opened the National Cash Register Company. Ten years later, National Cash Register had over one thousand employees and was on its way to becoming one of the most successful businesses of its time.
The best way to break a bad habit is to make it impractical to do. Increase the friction until you don’t even have the option to act. The brilliance of the cash register was that it automated ethical behavior by making stealing practically impossible. Rather than trying to change the employees, it made the preferred behavior automatic.
Some actions—like installing a cash register—pay off again and again. These onetime choices require a little bit of effort up front but create increasing value over time. I’m fascinated by the idea that a single choice can deliver returns again and again, and I surveyed my readers on their favorite onetime actions that lead to better long-term habits. The table on the following page shares some of the most popular answers.
I’d wager that if the average person were to simply do half of the onetime actions on this list—even if they didn’t give another thought to
 
their habits—most would find themselves living a better life a year from now. These onetime actions are a straightforward way to employ the 3rd Law of Behavior Change. They make it easier to sleep well, eat healthy, be productive, save money, and generally live better.
ONETIME ACTIONS THAT LOCK IN GOOD HABITS


Nutrition
Buy a water filter to clean your drinking water. Use smaller plates to reduce caloric intake.
Sleep
Buy a good mattress. Get blackout curtains.
Remove your television from your bedroom.
Productivity
Unsubscribe from emails.
Turn off notifications and mute group chats. Set your phone to silent.
Use email filters to clear up your inbox.
Delete games and social media apps on your phone.
Happiness
Get a dog.
Move to a friendly, social neighborhood.
General Health
Get vaccinated.
Buy good shoes to avoid back pain. Buy a supportive chair or standing desk.
Finance
Enroll in an automatic savings plan. Set up automatic bill pay.
Cut cable service.
Ask service providers to lower your bills.
Of course, there are many ways to automate good habits and eliminate bad ones. Typically, they involve putting technology to work for you. Technology can transform actions that were once hard, annoying, and complicated into behaviors that are easy, painless, and simple. It is the most reliable and effective way to guarantee the right behavior.
 
This is particularly useful for behaviors that happen too infrequently to become habitual. Things you have to do monthly or yearly—like rebalancing your investment portfolio—are never repeated frequently enough to become a habit, so they benefit in particular from technology “remembering” to do them for you.
Other examples include:

  Medicine: Prescriptions can be automatically refilled.
  Personal finance: Employees can save for retirement with an automatic wage deduction.
  Cooking: Meal-delivery services can do your grocery shopping.
  Productivity: Social media browsing can be cut off with a website blocker.

When you automate as much of your life as possible, you can spend your effort on the tasks machines cannot do yet. Each habit that we hand over to the authority of technology frees up time and energy to pour into the next stage of growth. As mathematician and philosopher Alfred North Whitehead wrote, “Civilization advances by extending the number of operations we can perform without thinking about them.”
Of course, the power of technology can work against us as well.
Binge-watching becomes a habit because you have to put more effort in to stop looking at the screen than to continue doing so. Instead of pressing a button to advance to the next episode, Netflix or YouTube will autoplay it for you. All you have to do is keep your eyes open.
Technology creates a level of convenience that enables you to act on your smallest whims and desires. At the mere suggestion of hunger, you can have food delivered to your door. At the slightest hint of boredom, you can get lost in the vast expanse of social media. When the effort required to act on your desires becomes effectively zero, you can find yourself slipping into whatever impulse arises at the moment. The downside of automation is that we can find ourselves jumping from easy task to easy task without making time for more difficult, but ultimately more rewarding, work.
I often find myself gravitating toward social media during any downtime. If I feel bored for just a fraction of a second, I reach for my phone. It’s easy to write off these minor distractions as “just taking a
 
break,” but over time they can accumulate into a serious issue. The constant tug of “just one more minute” can prevent me from doing anything of consequence. (I’m not the only one. The average person spends over two hours per day on social media. What could you do with an extra six hundred hours per year?)
During the year I was writing this book, I experimented with a new time management strategy. Every Monday, my assistant would reset the passwords on all my social media accounts, which logged me out on each device. All week I worked without distraction. On Friday, she would send me the new passwords. I had the entire weekend to enjoy what social media had to offer until Monday morning when she would do it again. (If you don’t have an assistant, team up with a friend or family member and reset each other’s passwords each week.)
One of the biggest surprises was how quickly I adapted. Within the first week of locking myself out of social media, I realized that I didn’t need to check it nearly as often as I had been, and I certainly didn’t need it each day. It had simply been so easy that it had become the default. Once my bad habit became impossible, I discovered that I did actually have the motivation to work on more meaningful tasks. After I removed the mental candy from my environment, it became much easier to eat the healthy stuff.
When working in your favor, automation can make your good habits inevitable and your bad habits impossible. It is the ultimate way to lock in future behavior rather than relying on willpower in the moment. By utilizing commitment devices, strategic onetime decisions, and technology, you can create an environment of inevitability—a space where good habits are not just an outcome you hope for but an outcome that is virtually guaranteed.

Chapter Summary
  The inversion of the 3rd Law of Behavior Change is make it difficult.
  A commitment device is a choice you make in the present that locks in better behavior in the future.
  The ultimate way to lock in future behavior is to automate your habits.
 
Onetime choices—like buying a better mattress or enrolling in an automatic savings plan—are single actions that automate your future habits and deliver increasing returns over time.
Using technology to automate your habits is the most reliable and effective way to guarantee the right behavior.

HOW TO CREATE A GOOD HABIT


The 1st Law: Make It Obvious
1.1	: Fill out the Habits Scorecard. Write down your current habits to become aware of them.
1.2	: Use implementation intentions: “I will [BEHAVIOR] at [TIME] in [LOCATION].”
1.3	: Use habit stacking: “After [CURRENT HABIT], I will [NEW HABIT].”
1.4	: Design your environment. Make the cues of good habits obvious and visible.
The 2nd Law: Make It Attractive
2.1	: Use temptation bundling. Pair an action you want to do with an action you need to do.
2.2	: Join a culture where your desired behavior is the normal behavior.
2.3	: Create a motivation ritual. Do something you enjoy immediately before a difficult habit.
The 3rd Law: Make It Easy
3.1	: Reduce friction. Decrease the number of steps between you and your good habits.
3.2	: Prime the environment. Prepare your environment to make future actions easier.
3.3	: Master the decisive moment. Optimize the small choices that deliver outsized impact.
3.4	: Use the Two-Minute Rule. Downscale your habits until they can be done in two minutes or less.
3.5	: Automate your habits. Invest in technology and onetime purchases that lock in future behavior.
The 4th Law: Make It Satisfying

HOW TO BREAK A BAD HABIT


Inversion of the 1st Law: Make It Invisible
1.5: Reduce exposure. Remove the cues of your bad habits from your environment.
Inversion of the 2nd Law: Make It Unattractive
2.4: Reframe your mind-set. Highlight the benefits of avoiding your bad habits.
Inversion of the 3rd Law: Make It Difficult
3.6	: Increase friction. Increase the number of steps between you and your bad habits.
3.7	: Use a commitment device. Restrict your future choices to the ones that benefit you.
Inversion of the 4th Law: Make It Unsatisfying

You can download a printable version of this habits cheat sheet at: atomichabits.com/cheatsheet 

15
The Cardinal Rule of Behavior Change
N THE LATE 1990S, a public health worker named Stephen Luby left his hometown of Omaha, Nebraska, and bought a one-way ticket to
Karachi, Pakistan.
Karachi was one of the most populous cities in the world. By 1998, over nine million people called it home. It was the economic center of Pakistan and a transportation hub, with some of the most active airports and seaports in the region. In the commercial parts of town, you could find all of the standard urban amenities and bustling downtown streets. But Karachi was also one of the least livable cities in the world.
Over 60 percent of Karachi’s residents lived in squatter settlements and slums. These densely packed neighborhoods were filled with makeshift houses cobbled together from old boards, cinder blocks, and other discarded materials. There was no waste removal system, no electricity grid, no clean water supply. When dry, the streets were a combination of dust and trash. When wet, they became a muddy pit of sewage. Mosquito colonies thrived in pools of stagnant water, and children played among the garbage.
The unsanitary conditions lead to widespread illness and disease. Contaminated water sources caused epidemics of diarrhea, vomiting, and abdominal pain. Nearly one third of the children living there were malnourished. With so many people crammed into such a small space, viruses and bacterial infections spread rapidly. It was this public health crisis that had brought Stephen Luby to Pakistan.
Luby and his team realized that in an environment with poor sanitation, the simple habit of washing your hands could make a real
 
difference in the health of the residents. But they soon discovered that many people were already aware that handwashing was important.
And yet, despite this knowledge, many residents were washing their hands in a haphazard fashion. Some people would just run their hands under the water quickly. Others would only wash one hand. Many would simply forget to wash their hands before preparing food.
Everyone said handwashing was important, but few people made a habit out of it. The problem wasn’t knowledge. The problem was consistency.
That was when Luby and his team partnered with Procter & Gamble to supply the neighborhood with Safeguard soap. Compared to your standard bar of soap, using Safeguard was a more enjoyable experience.
“In Pakistan, Safeguard was a premium soap,” Luby told me. “The study participants commonly mentioned how much they liked it.” The soap foamed easily, and people were able to lather their hands with suds. It smelled great. Instantly, handwashing became slightly more pleasurable.
“I see the goal of handwashing promotion not as behavior change but as habit adoption,” Luby said. “It is a lot easier for people to adopt a product that provides a strong positive sensory signal, for example the mint taste of toothpaste, than it is to adopt a habit that does not provide pleasurable sensory feedback, like flossing one’s teeth. The marketing team at Procter & Gamble talked about trying to create a positive handwashing experience.”
Within months, the researchers saw a rapid shift in the health of children in the neighborhood. The rate of diarrhea fell by 52 percent; pneumonia by 48 percent; and impetigo, a bacterial skin infection, by 35 percent.
The long-term effects were even better. “We went back to some of the households in Karachi six years after,” Luby told me. “Over 95 percent of households who had been given the soap for free and encouraged to wash their hands had a handwashing station with soap and water available when our study team visited	We had not given
any soap to the intervention group for over five years, but during the trial they had become so habituated to wash their hands, that they had
 
maintained the practice.” It was a powerful example of the fourth and final Law of Behavior Change: make it satisfying.
We are more likely to repeat a behavior when the experience is satisfying. This is entirely logical. Feelings of pleasure—even minor ones like washing your hands with soap that smells nice and lathers well—are signals that tell the brain: “This feels good. Do this again, next time.” Pleasure teaches your brain that a behavior is worth remembering and repeating.
Take the story of chewing gum. Chewing gum had been sold commercially throughout the 1800s, but it wasn’t until Wrigley launched in 1891 that it became a worldwide habit. Early versions were made from relatively bland resins—chewy, but not tasty. Wrigley revolutionized the industry by adding flavors like Spearmint and Juicy Fruit, which made the product flavorful and fun to use. Then they went a step further and began pushing chewing gum as a pathway to a clean mouth. Advertisements told readers to “Refresh Your Taste.”
Tasty flavors and the feeling of a fresh mouth provided little bits of immediate reinforcement and made the product satisfying to use.
Consumption skyrocketed, and Wrigley became the largest chewing gum company in the world.
Toothpaste had a similar trajectory. Manufacturers enjoyed great success when they added flavors like spearmint, peppermint, and cinnamon to their products. These flavors don’t improve the effectiveness of toothpaste. They simply create a “clean mouth” feel and make the experience of brushing your teeth more pleasurable. My wife actually stopped using Sensodyne because she didn’t like the aftertaste. She switched to a brand with a stronger mint flavor, which proved to be more satisfying.
Conversely, if an experience is not satisfying, we have little reason to repeat it. In my research, I came across the story of a woman who had a narcissistic relative who drove her nuts. In an attempt to spend less time with this egomaniac, she acted as dull and as boring as possible whenever he was around. Within a few encounters, he started avoiding her because he found her so uninteresting.
Stories like these are evidence of the Cardinal Rule of Behavior Change: What is rewarded is repeated. What is punished is avoided. You learn what to do in the future based on what you were rewarded
 
for doing (or punished for doing) in the past. Positive emotions cultivate habits. Negative emotions destroy them.
The first three laws of behavior change—make it obvious, make it attractive, and make it easy—increase the odds that a behavior will be performed this time. The fourth law of behavior change—make it satisfying—increases the odds that a behavior will be repeated next time. It completes the habit loop.
But there is a trick. We are not looking for just any type of satisfaction. We are looking for immediate satisfaction.

THE MISMATCH BETWEEN IMMEDIATE AND DELAYED REWARDS
Imagine you’re an animal roaming the plains of Africa—a giraffe or an elephant or a lion. On any given day, most of your decisions have an immediate impact. You are always thinking about what to eat or where to sleep or how to avoid a predator. You are constantly focused on the present or the very near future. You live in what scientists call an immediate-return environment because your actions instantly deliver clear and immediate outcomes.
Now switch back to your human self. In modern society, many of the choices you make today will not benefit you immediately. If you do a good job at work, you’ll get a paycheck in a few weeks. If you exercise today, perhaps you won’t be overweight next year. If you save money now, maybe you’ll have enough for retirement decades from now. You live in what scientists call a delayed-return environment because you can work for years before your actions deliver the intended payoff.
The human brain did not evolve for life in a delayed-return environment. The earliest remains of modern humans, known as Homo sapiens sapiens, are approximately two hundred thousand years old. These were the first humans to have a brain relatively similar to ours. In particular, the neocortex—the newest part of the brain and the region responsible for higher functions like language—was roughly the same size two hundred thousand years ago as today. You are walking around with the same hardware as your Paleolithic ancestors.
It is only recently—during the last five hundred years or so—that society has shifted to a predominantly delayed-return environment.*
 
Compared to the age of the brain, modern society is brand-new. In the last one hundred years, we have seen the rise of the car, the airplane, the television, the personal computer, the internet, the smartphone, and Beyoncé. The world has changed much in recent years, but human nature has changed little.
Similar to other animals on the African savannah, our ancestors spent their days responding to grave threats, securing the next meal, and taking shelter from a storm. It made sense to place a high value on instant gratification. The distant future was less of a concern. And after thousands of generations in an immediate-return environment, our brains evolved to prefer quick payoffs to long-term ones.
Behavioral economists refer to this tendency as time inconsistency.
That is, the way your brain evaluates rewards is inconsistent across time.* You value the present more than the future. Usually, this tendency serves us well. A reward that is certain right now is typically worth more than one that is merely possible in the future. But occasionally, our bias toward instant gratification causes problems.
Why would someone smoke if they know it increases the risk of lung cancer? Why would someone overeat when they know it increases their risk of obesity? Why would someone have unsafe sex if they know it can result in sexually transmitted disease? Once you understand how the brain prioritizes rewards, the answers become clear: the consequences of bad habits are delayed while the rewards are immediate. Smoking might kill you in ten years, but it reduces stress and eases your nicotine cravings now. Overeating is harmful in the long run but appetizing in the moment. Sex—safe or not—provides pleasure right away. Disease and infection won’t show up for days or weeks, even years.
Every habit produces multiple outcomes across time. Unfortunately, these outcomes are often misaligned. With our bad habits, the immediate outcome usually feels good, but the ultimate outcome feels bad. With good habits, it is the reverse: the immediate outcome is unenjoyable, but the ultimate outcome feels good. The French economist Frédéric Bastiat explained the problem clearly when he wrote, “It almost always happens that when the immediate consequence is favorable, the later consequences are disastrous, and vice versa	Often, the sweeter the first fruit of a habit, the more
bitter are its later fruits.”
 
Put another way, the costs of your good habits are in the present.
The costs of your bad habits are in the future.
The brain’s tendency to prioritize the present moment means you can’t rely on good intentions. When you make a plan—to lose weight, write a book, or learn a language—you are actually making plans for your future self. And when you envision what you want your life to be like, it is easy to see the value in taking actions with long-term benefits. We all want better lives for our future selves. However, when the moment of decision arrives, instant gratification usually wins. You are no longer making a choice for Future You, who dreams of being fitter or wealthier or happier. You are choosing for Present You, who wants to be full, pampered, and entertained. As a general rule, the more immediate pleasure you get from an action, the more strongly you should question whether it aligns with your long-term goals.*
With a fuller understanding of what causes our brain to repeat some behaviors and avoid others, let’s update the Cardinal Rule of Behavior Change: What is immediately rewarded is repeated. What is immediately punished is avoided.
Our preference for instant gratification reveals an important truth about success: because of how we are wired, most people will spend all day chasing quick hits of satisfaction. The road less traveled is the road of delayed gratification. If you’re willing to wait for the rewards, you’ll face less competition and often get a bigger payoff. As the saying goes, the last mile is always the least crowded.
This is precisely what research has shown. People who are better at delaying gratification have higher SAT scores, lower levels of substance abuse, lower likelihood of obesity, better responses to stress, and superior social skills. We’ve all seen this play out in our own lives. If you delay watching television and get your homework done, you’ll generally learn more and get better grades. If you don’t buy desserts and chips at the store, you’ll often eat healthier food when you get home. At some point, success in nearly every field requires you to ignore an immediate reward in favor of a delayed reward.
Here’s the problem: most people know that delaying gratification is the wise approach. They want the benefits of good habits: to be healthy, productive, at peace. But these outcomes are seldom top-of- mind at the decisive moment. Thankfully, it’s possible to train yourself to delay gratification—but you need to work with the grain of human
 
nature, not against it. The best way to do this is to add a little bit of immediate pleasure to the habits that pay off in the long-run and a little bit of immediate pain to ones that don’t.

HOW TO TURN INSTANT GRATIFICATION TO YOUR ADVANTAGE
The vital thing in getting a habit to stick is to feel successful—even if it’s in a small way. The feeling of success is a signal that your habit paid off and that the work was worth the effort.
In a perfect world, the reward for a good habit is the habit itself. In the real world, good habits tend to feel worthwhile only after they have provided you with something. Early on, it’s all sacrifice. You’ve gone to the gym a few times, but you’re not stronger or fitter or faster—at least, not in any noticeable sense. It’s only months later, once you shed a few pounds or your arms gain some definition, that it becomes easier to exercise for its own sake. In the beginning, you need a reason to stay on track. This is why immediate rewards are essential. They keep you excited while the delayed rewards accumulate in the background.
What we’re really talking about here—when we’re discussing immediate rewards—is the ending of a behavior. The ending of any experience is vital because we tend to remember it more than other phases. You want the ending of your habit to be satisfying. The best approach is to use reinforcement, which refers to the process of using an immediate reward to increase the rate of a behavior. Habit stacking, which we covered in Chapter 5, ties your habit to an immediate cue, which makes it obvious when to start. Reinforcement ties your habit to an immediate reward, which makes it satisfying when you finish.
Immediate reinforcement can be especially helpful when dealing with habits of avoidance, which are behaviors you want to stop doing. It can be challenging to stick with habits like “no frivolous purchases” or “no alcohol this month” because nothing happens when you skip happy hour drinks or don’t buy that pair of shoes. It can be hard to feel satisfied when there is no action in the first place. All you’re doing is resisting temptation, and there isn’t much satisfying about that.
One solution is to turn the situation on its head. You want to make avoidance visible. Open a savings account and label it for something you want—maybe “Leather Jacket.” Whenever you pass on a purchase, put the same amount of money in the account. Skip your morning
 
latte? Transfer $5. Pass on another month of Netflix? Move $10 over. It’s like creating a loyalty program for yourself. The immediate reward of seeing yourself save money toward the leather jacket feels a lot better than being deprived. You are making it satisfying to do nothing.
One of my readers and his wife used a similar setup. They wanted to stop eating out so much and start cooking together more. They labeled their savings account “Trip to Europe.” Whenever they skipped going out to eat, they transferred $50 into the account. At the end of the year, they put the money toward the vacation.
It is worth noting that it is important to select short-term rewards that reinforce your identity rather than ones that conflict with it.
Buying a new jacket is fine if you’re trying to lose weight or read more books, but it doesn’t work if you’re trying to budget and save money. Instead, taking a bubble bath or going on a leisurely walk are good examples of rewarding yourself with free time, which aligns with your ultimate goal of more freedom and financial independence. Similarly, if your reward for exercising is eating a bowl of ice cream, then you’re casting votes for conflicting identities, and it ends up being a wash.
Instead, maybe your reward is a massage, which is both a luxury and a vote toward taking care of your body. Now the short-term reward is aligned with your long-term vision of being a healthy person.
Eventually, as intrinsic rewards like a better mood, more energy, and reduced stress kick in, you’ll become less concerned with chasing the secondary reward. The identity itself becomes the reinforcer. You do it because it’s who you are and it feels good to be you. The more a habit becomes part of your life, the less you need outside encouragement to follow through. Incentives can start a habit. Identity sustains a habit.
That said, it takes time for the evidence to accumulate and a new identity to emerge. Immediate reinforcement helps maintain motivation in the short term while you’re waiting for the long-term rewards to arrive.
In summary, a habit needs to be enjoyable for it to last. Simple bits of reinforcement—like soap that smells great or toothpaste that has a refreshing mint flavor or seeing $50 hit your savings account—can offer the immediate pleasure you need to enjoy a habit. And change is easy when it is enjoyable.
 

 
Chapter Summary
The 4th Law of Behavior Change is make it satisfying.
We are more likely to repeat a behavior when the experience is satisfying.
The human brain evolved to prioritize immediate rewards over delayed rewards.
The Cardinal Rule of Behavior Change: What is immediately rewarded is repeated. What is immediately punished is avoided.
To get a habit to stick you need to feel immediately successful— even if it’s in a small way.
The first three laws of behavior change—make it obvious, make it attractive, and make it easy—increase the odds that a behavior will be performed this time. The fourth law of behavior change
—make it satisfying—increases the odds that a behavior will be repeated next time.
 

16
How to Stick with Good Habits Every Day
N 1993, a bank in Abbotsford, Canada, hired a twenty-three-year-old stockbroker named Trent Dyrsmid. Abbotsford was a relatively small
suburb, tucked away in the shadow of nearby Vancouver, where most of the big business deals were being made. Given the location, and the fact that Dyrsmid was a rookie, nobody expected too much of him. But he made brisk progress thanks to a simple daily habit.
Dyrsmid began each morning with two jars on his desk. One was filled with 120 paper clips. The other was empty. As soon as he settled in each day, he would make a sales call. Immediately after, he would move one paper clip from the full jar to the empty jar and the process would begin again. “Every morning I would start with 120 paper clips in one jar and I would keep dialing the phone until I had moved them all to the second jar,” he told me.
Within eighteen months, Dyrsmid was bringing in $5 million to the firm. By age twenty-four, he was making $75,000 per year—the equivalent of $125,000 today. Not long after, he landed a six-figure job with another company.
I like to refer to this technique as the Paper Clip Strategy and, over the years, I’ve heard from readers who have employed it in a variety of ways. One woman shifted a hairpin from one container to another whenever she wrote a page of her book. Another man moved a marble from one bin to the next after each set of push-ups.
Making progress is satisfying, and visual measures—like moving paper clips or hairpins or marbles—provide clear evidence of your progress. As a result, they reinforce your behavior and add a little bit of immediate satisfaction to any activity. Visual measurement comes in
 
many forms: food journals, workout logs, loyalty punch cards, the progress bar on a software download, even the page numbers in a book. But perhaps the best way to measure your progress is with a habit tracker.

HOW TO KEEP YOUR HABITS ON TRACK
A habit tracker is a simple way to measure whether you did a habit. The most basic format is to get a calendar and cross off each day you stick with your routine. For example, if you meditate on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, each of those dates gets an X. As time rolls by, the calendar becomes a record of your habit streak.
Countless people have tracked their habits, but perhaps the most famous was Benjamin Franklin. Beginning at age twenty, Franklin carried a small booklet everywhere he went and used it to track thirteen personal virtues. This list included goals like “Lose no time. Be always employed in something useful” and “Avoid trifling conversation.” At the end of each day, Franklin would open his booklet and record his progress.
Jerry Seinfeld reportedly uses a habit tracker to stick with his streak of writing jokes. In the documentary Comedian, he explains that his goal is simply to “never break the chain” of writing jokes every day. In other words, he is not focused on how good or bad a particular joke is or how inspired he feels. He is simply focused on showing up and adding to his streak.
“Don’t break the chain” is a powerful mantra. Don’t break the chain of sales calls and you’ll build a successful book of business. Don’t break the chain of workouts and you’ll get fit faster than you’d expect. Don’t break the chain of creating every day and you will end up with an impressive portfolio. Habit tracking is powerful because it leverages multiple Laws of Behavior Change. It simultaneously makes a behavior obvious, attractive, and satisfying.
Let’s break down each one.

Benefit #1: Habit tracking is obvious.
 
Recording your last action creates a trigger that can initiate your next one. Habit tracking naturally builds a series of visual cues like the streak of X’s on your calendar or the list of meals in your food log.
When you look at the calendar and see your streak, you’ll be reminded to act again. Research has shown that people who track their progress on goals like losing weight, quitting smoking, and lowering blood pressure are all more likely to improve than those who don’t. One study of more than sixteen hundred people found that those who kept a daily food log lost twice as much weight as those who did not. The mere act of tracking a behavior can spark the urge to change it.
Habit tracking also keeps you honest. Most of us have a distorted view of our own behavior. We think we act better than we do.
Measurement offers one way to overcome our blindness to our own behavior and notice what’s really going on each day. One glance at the paper clips in the container and you immediately know how much work you have (or haven’t) been putting in. When the evidence is right in front of you, you’re less likely to lie to yourself.

Benefit #2: Habit tracking is attractive.
The most effective form of motivation is progress. When we get a signal that we are moving forward, we become more motivated to continue down that path. In this way, habit tracking can have an addictive effect on motivation. Each small win feeds your desire.
This can be particularly powerful on a bad day. When you’re feeling down, it’s easy to forget about all the progress you have already made. Habit tracking provides visual proof of your hard work—a subtle reminder of how far you’ve come. Plus, the empty square you see each morning can motivate you to get started because you don’t want to lose your progress by breaking the streak.

Benefit #3: Habit tracking is satisfying.
This is the most crucial benefit of all. Tracking can become its own form of reward. It is satisfying to cross an item off your to-do list, to complete an entry in your workout log, or to mark an X on the calendar. It feels good to watch your results grow—the size of your
 
investment portfolio, the length of your book manuscript—and if it feels good, then you’re more likely to endure.
Habit tracking also helps keep your eye on the ball: you’re focused on the process rather than the result. You’re not fixated on getting six- pack abs, you’re just trying to keep the streak alive and become the type of person who doesn’t miss workouts.
In summary, habit tracking (1) creates a visual cue that can remind you to act, (2) is inherently motivating because you see the progress you are making and don’t want to lose it, and (3) feels satisfying whenever you record another successful instance of your habit.
Furthermore, habit tracking provides visual proof that you are casting votes for the type of person you wish to become, which is a delightful form of immediate and intrinsic gratification.*
You may be wondering, if habit tracking is so useful, why have I waited so long to talk about it?
Despite all the benefits, I’ve left this discussion until now for a simple reason: many people resist the idea of tracking and measuring. It can feel like a burden because it forces you into two habits: the habit you’re trying to build and the habit of tracking it. Counting calories sounds like a hassle when you’re already struggling to follow a diet.
Writing down every sales call seems tedious when you’ve got work to do. It feels easier to say, “I’ll just eat less.” Or, “I’ll try harder.” Or, “I’ll remember to do it.” People inevitably tell me things like, “I have a decision journal, but I wish I used it more.” Or, “I recorded my workouts for a week, but then quit.” I’ve been there myself. I once made a food log to track my calories. I managed to do it for one meal and then gave up.
Tracking isn’t for everyone, and there is no need to measure your entire life. But nearly anyone can benefit from it in some form—even if it’s only temporary.
What can we do to make tracking easier?
First, whenever possible, measurement should be automated. You’ll probably be surprised by how much you’re already tracking without knowing it. Your credit card statement tracks how often you go out to eat. Your Fitbit registers how many steps you take and how long you sleep. Your calendar records how many new places you travel to each year. Once you know where to get the data, add a note to your calendar
 
to review it each week or each month, which is more practical than tracking it every day.
Second, manual tracking should be limited to your most important habits. It is better to consistently track one habit than to sporadically track ten.
Finally, record each measurement immediately after the habit occurs. The completion of the behavior is the cue to write it down. This approach allows you to combine the habit-stacking method mentioned in Chapter 5 with habit tracking.
The habit stacking + habit tracking formula is: After [CURRENT HABIT], I will [TRACK MY HABIT].
  After I hang up the phone from a sales call, I will move one paper clip over.
  After I finish each set at the gym, I will record it in my workout journal.
  After I put my plate in the dishwasher, I will write down what I ate.

These tactics can make tracking your habits easier. Even if you aren’t the type of person who enjoys recording your behavior, I think you’ll find a few weeks of measurements to be insightful. It’s always interesting to see how you’ve actually been spending your time.
That said, every habit streak ends at some point. And, more important than any single measurement, is having a good plan for when your habits slide off track.

HOW TO RECOVER QUICKLY WHEN YOUR HABITS BREAK DOWN
No matter how consistent you are with your habits, it is inevitable that life will interrupt you at some point. Perfection is not possible. Before long, an emergency will pop up—you get sick or you have to travel for work or your family needs a little more of your time.
Whenever this happens to me, I try to remind myself of a simple rule: never miss twice.
 
If I miss one day, I try to get back into it as quickly as possible.
Missing one workout happens, but I’m not going to miss two in a row. Maybe I’ll eat an entire pizza, but I’ll follow it up with a healthy meal. I can’t be perfect, but I can avoid a second lapse. As soon as one streak ends, I get started on the next one.
The first mistake is never the one that ruins you. It is the spiral of repeated mistakes that follows. Missing once is an accident. Missing twice is the start of a new habit.
This is a distinguishing feature between winners and losers. Anyone can have a bad performance, a bad workout, or a bad day at work. But when successful people fail, they rebound quickly. The breaking of a habit doesn’t matter if the reclaiming of it is fast.
I think this principle is so important that I’ll stick to it even if I can’t do a habit as well or as completely as I would like. Too often, we fall into an all-or-nothing cycle with our habits. The problem is not slipping up; the problem is thinking that if you can’t do something perfectly, then you shouldn’t do it at all.
You don’t realize how valuable it is to just show up on your bad (or busy) days. Lost days hurt you more than successful days help you. If you start with $100, then a 50 percent gain will take you to $150. But you only need a 33 percent loss to take you back to $100. In other words, avoiding a 33 percent loss is just as valuable as achieving a 50 percent gain. As Charlie Munger says, “The first rule of compounding: Never interrupt it unnecessarily.”
This is why the “bad” workouts are often the most important ones.
Sluggish days and bad workouts maintain the compound gains you accrued from previous good days. Simply doing something—ten squats, five sprints, a push-up, anything really—is huge. Don’t put up a zero. Don’t let losses eat into your compounding.
Furthermore, it’s not always about what happens during the workout. It’s about being the type of person who doesn’t miss workouts. It’s easy to train when you feel good, but it’s crucial to show up when you don’t feel like it—even if you do less than you hope. Going to the gym for five minutes may not improve your performance, but it reaffirms your identity.
The all-or-nothing cycle of behavior change is just one pitfall that can derail your habits. Another potential danger—especially if you are
 
using a habit tracker—is measuring the wrong thing.

KNOWING WHEN (AND WHEN NOT) TO TRACK A HABIT
Say you’re running a restaurant and you want to know if your chef is doing a good job. One way to measure success is to track how many customers pay for a meal each day. If more customers come in, the food must be good. If fewer customers come in, something must be wrong.
However, this one measurement—daily revenue—only gives a limited picture of what’s really going on. Just because someone pays for a meal doesn’t mean they enjoy the meal. Even dissatisfied customers are unlikely to dine and dash. In fact, if you’re only measuring revenue, the food might be getting worse but you’re making up for it with marketing or discounts or some other method. Instead, it may be more effective to track how many customers finish their meal or perhaps the percentage of customers who leave a generous tip.
The dark side of tracking a particular behavior is that we become driven by the number rather than the purpose behind it. If your success is measured by quarterly earnings, you will optimize sales, revenue, and accounting for quarterly earnings. If your success is measured by a lower number on the scale, you will optimize for a lower number on the scale, even if that means embracing crash diets, juice cleanses, and fat-loss pills. The human mind wants to “win” whatever game is being played.
This pitfall is evident in many areas of life. We focus on working long hours instead of getting meaningful work done. We care more about getting ten thousand steps than we do about being healthy. We teach for standardized tests instead of emphasizing learning, curiosity, and critical thinking. In short, we optimize for what we measure. When we choose the wrong measurement, we get the wrong behavior.
This is sometimes referred to as Goodhart’s Law. Named after the economist Charles Goodhart, the principle states, “When a measure becomes a target, it ceases to be a good measure.” Measurement is only useful when it guides you and adds context to a larger picture, not when it consumes you. Each number is simply one piece of feedback in the overall system.
 
In our data-driven world, we tend to overvalue numbers and undervalue anything ephemeral, soft, and difficult to quantify. We mistakenly think the factors we can measure are the only factors that exist. But just because you can measure something doesn’t mean it’s the most important thing. And just because you can’t measure something doesn’t mean it’s not important at all.
All of this to say, it’s crucial to keep habit tracking in its proper place. It can feel satisfying to record a habit and track your progress, but the measurement is not the only thing that matters. Furthermore, there are many ways to measure progress, and sometimes it helps to shift your focus to something entirely different.
This is why nonscale victories can be effective for weight loss. The number on the scale may be stubborn, so if you focus solely on that number, your motivation will sag. But you may notice that your skin looks better or you wake up earlier or your sex drive got a boost. All of these are valid ways to track your improvement. If you’re not feeling motivated by the number on the scale, perhaps it’s time to focus on a different measurement—one that gives you more signals of progress.
No matter how you measure your improvement, habit tracking offers a simple way to make your habits more satisfying. Each measurement provides a little bit of evidence that you’re moving in the right direction and a brief moment of immediate pleasure for a job well done.

Chapter Summary
One of the most satisfying feelings is the feeling of making progress.
A habit tracker is a simple way to measure whether you did a habit—like marking an X on a calendar.
Habit trackers and other visual forms of measurement can make your habits satisfying by providing clear evidence of your progress.
Don’t break the chain. Try to keep your habit streak alive.
Never miss twice. If you miss one day, try to get back on track as quickly as possible.
 
Just because you can measure something doesn’t mean it’s the most important thing.
 

17
How an Accountability Partner Can Change Everything
FTER SERVING AS a pilot in World War II, Roger Fisher attended Harvard Law School and spent thirty-four years specializing in
negotiation and conflict management. He founded the Harvard Negotiation Project and worked with numerous countries and world leaders on peace resolutions, hostage crises, and diplomatic compromises. But it was in the 1970s and 1980s, as the threat of nuclear war escalated, that Fisher developed perhaps his most interesting idea.
At the time, Fisher was focused on designing strategies that could prevent nuclear war, and he had noticed a troubling fact. Any sitting president would have access to launch codes that could kill millions of people but would never actually see anyone die because he would always be thousands of miles away.
“My suggestion was quite simple,” he wrote in 1981. “Put that [nuclear] code number in a little capsule, and then implant that capsule right next to the heart of a volunteer. The volunteer would carry with him a big, heavy butcher knife as he accompanied the President. If ever the President wanted to fire nuclear weapons, the only way he could do so would be for him first, with his own hands, to kill one human being. The President says, ‘George, I’m sorry but tens of millions must die.’ He has to look at someone and realize what death is—what an innocent death is. Blood on the White House carpet. It’s reality brought home.
 
“When I suggested this to friends in the Pentagon they said, ‘My God, that’s terrible. Having to kill someone would distort the President’s judgment. He might never push the button.’”
Throughout our discussion of the 4th Law of Behavior Change we have covered the importance of making good habits immediately satisfying. Fisher’s proposal is an inversion of the 4th Law: Make it immediately unsatisfying.
Just as we are more likely to repeat an experience when the ending is satisfying, we are also more likely to avoid an experience when the ending is painful. Pain is an effective teacher. If a failure is painful, it gets fixed. If a failure is relatively painless, it gets ignored. The more immediate and more costly a mistake is, the faster you will learn from it. The threat of a bad review forces a plumber to be good at his job.
The possibility of a customer never returning makes restaurants create good food. The cost of cutting the wrong blood vessel makes a surgeon master human anatomy and cut carefully. When the consequences are severe, people learn quickly.
The more immediate the pain, the less likely the behavior. If you want to prevent bad habits and eliminate unhealthy behaviors, then adding an instant cost to the action is a great way to reduce their odds.
We repeat bad habits because they serve us in some way, and that makes them hard to abandon. The best way I know to overcome this predicament is to increase the speed of the punishment associated with the behavior. There can’t be a gap between the action and the consequences.
As soon as actions incur an immediate consequence, behavior begins to change. Customers pay their bills on time when they are charged a late fee. Students show up to class when their grade is linked to attendance. We’ll jump through a lot of hoops to avoid a little bit of immediate pain.
There is, of course, a limit to this. If you’re going to rely on punishment to change behavior, then the strength of the punishment must match the relative strength of the behavior it is trying to correct. To be productive, the cost of procrastination must be greater than the cost of action. To be healthy, the cost of laziness must be greater than the cost of exercise. Getting fined for smoking in a restaurant or failing
 
to recycle adds consequence to an action. Behavior only shifts if the punishment is painful enough and reliably enforced.
In general, the more local, tangible, concrete, and immediate the consequence, the more likely it is to influence individual behavior. The more global, intangible, vague, and delayed the consequence, the less likely it is to influence individual behavior.
Thankfully, there is a straightforward way to add an immediate cost to any bad habit: create a habit contract.

THE HABIT CONTRACT
The first seat belt law was passed in New York on December 1, 1984. At the time, just 14 percent of people in the United States regularly wore a seat belt—but that was all about to change.
Within five years, over half of the nation had seat belt laws. Today, wearing a seat belt is enforceable by law in forty-nine of the fifty states. And it’s not just the legislation, the number of people wearing seat belts has changed dramatically as well. In 2016, over 88 percent of Americans buckled up each time they got in a car. In just over thirty years, there was a complete reversal in the habits of millions of people.
Laws and regulations are an example of how government can change our habits by creating a social contract. As a society, we collectively agree to abide by certain rules and then enforce them as a group. Whenever a new piece of legislation impacts behavior—seat belt laws, banning smoking inside restaurants, mandatory recycling—it is an example of a social contract shaping our habits. The group agrees to act in a certain way, and if you don’t follow along, you’ll be punished.
Just as governments use laws to hold citizens accountable, you can create a habit contract to hold yourself accountable. A habit contract is a verbal or written agreement in which you state your commitment to a particular habit and the punishment that will occur if you don’t follow through. Then you find one or two people to act as your accountability partners and sign off on the contract with you.
Bryan Harris, an entrepreneur from Nashville, Tennessee, was the first person I saw put this strategy into action. Shortly after the birth of his son, Harris realized he wanted to shed a few pounds. He wrote up a habit contract between himself, his wife, and his personal trainer. The
 
first version read, “Bryan’s #1 objective for Q1 of 2017 is to start eating correctly again so he feels better, looks better, and is able to hit his long-term goal of 200 pounds at 10% body fat.”
Below that statement, Harris laid out a road map for achieving his ideal outcome:

  Phase #1: Get back to a strict “slow-carb” diet in Q1.
  Phase #2: Start a strict macronutrient tracking program in Q2.
  Phase #3: Refine and maintain the details of his diet and workout program in Q3.

Finally, he wrote out each of the daily habits that would get him to his goal. For example, “Write down all food that he consumes each day and weigh himself each day.”
And then he listed the punishment if he failed: “If Bryan doesn’t do these two items then the following consequence will be enforced: He will have to dress up each workday and each Sunday morning for the rest of the quarter. Dress up is defined as not wearing jeans, t-shirts, hoodies, or shorts. He will also give Joey (his trainer) $200 to use as he sees fit if he misses one day of logging food.”
At the bottom of the page, Harris, his wife, and his trainer all signed the contract.
My initial reaction was that a contract like this seemed overly formal and unnecessary, especially the signatures. But Harris convinced me that signing the contract was an indication of seriousness. “Anytime I skip this part,” he said, “I start slacking almost immediately.”
Three months later, after hitting his targets for Q1, Harris upgraded his goals. The consequences escalated, too. If he missed his carbohydrate and protein targets, he had to pay his trainer $100. And if he failed to weigh himself, he had to give his wife $500 to use as she saw fit. Perhaps most painfully, if he forgot to run sprints, he had to dress up for work every day and wear an Alabama hat the rest of the quarter—the bitter rival of his beloved Auburn team.
The strategy worked. With his wife and trainer acting as accountability partners and with the habit contract clarifying exactly
 
what to do each day, Harris lost the weight.*
To make bad habits unsatisfying, your best option is to make them painful in the moment. Creating a habit contract is a straightforward way to do exactly that.
Even if you don’t want to create a full-blown habit contract, simply having an accountability partner is useful. The comedian Margaret Cho writes a joke or song every day. She does the “song a day” challenge with a friend, which helps them both stay accountable. Knowing that someone is watching can be a powerful motivator. You are less likely to procrastinate or give up because there is an immediate cost. If you don’t follow through, perhaps they’ll see you as untrustworthy or lazy. Suddenly, you are not only failing to uphold your promises to yourself, but also failing to uphold your promises to others.
You can even automate this process. Thomas Frank, an entrepreneur in Boulder, Colorado, wakes up at 5:55 each morning. And if he doesn’t, he has a tweet automatically scheduled that says, “It’s 6:10 and I’m not up because I’m lazy! Reply to this for $5 via PayPal (limit 5), assuming my alarm didn’t malfunction.”
We are always trying to present our best selves to the world. We comb our hair and brush our teeth and dress ourselves carefully because we know these habits are likely to get a positive reaction. We want to get good grades and graduate from top schools to impress potential employers and mates and our friends and family. We care about the opinions of those around us because it helps if others like us. This is precisely why getting an accountability partner or signing a habit contract can work so well.

Chapter Summary
  The inversion of the 4th Law of Behavior Change is make it unsatisfying.
  We are less likely to repeat a bad habit if it is painful or unsatisfying.
  An accountability partner can create an immediate cost to inaction. We care deeply about what others think of us, and we do not want others to have a lesser opinion of us.
  A habit contract can be used to add a social cost to any behavior. It makes the costs of violating your promises public and painful.
 
Knowing that someone else is watching you can be a powerful motivator.

HOW TO CREATE A GOOD HABIT


The 1st Law: Make It Obvious
1.1	: Fill out the Habits Scorecard. Write down your current habits to become aware of them.
1.2	: Use implementation intentions: “I will [BEHAVIOR] at [TIME] in [LOCATION].”
1.3	: Use habit stacking: “After [CURRENT HABIT], I will [NEW HABIT].”
1.4	: Design your environment. Make the cues of good habits obvious and visible.
The 2nd Law:Make It Attractive
2.1	: Use temptation bundling. Pair an action you want to do with an action you need to do.
2.2	: Join a culture where your desired behavior is the normal behavior.
2.3	: Create a motivation ritual. Do something you enjoy immediately before a difficult habit.
The 3rd Law: Make It Easy
3.1	: Reduce friction. Decrease the number of steps between you and your good habits.
3.2	: Prime the environment. Prepare your environment to make future actions easier.
3.3	: Master the decisive moment. Optimize the small choices that deliver outsized impact.
3.4	: Use the Two-Minute Rule. Downscale your habits until they can be done in two minutes or less.
3.5	: Automate your habits. Invest in technology and onetime purchases that lock in future behavior.
The 4th Law: Make It Satisfying
4.1	: Use reinforcement. Give yourself an immediate reward when you complete your habit.
4.2	: Make “doing nothing” enjoyable. When avoiding a bad habit, design a way to see the benefits.
4.3	: Use a habit tracker. Keep track of your habit streak and “don’t break the chain.”
4.4	: Never miss twice. When you forget to do a habit, make sure you get back on track immediately.
HOW TO BREAK A BAD HABIT


Inversion of the 1st Law: Make It Invisible
1.5: Reduce exposure. Remove the cues of your bad habits from your environment.
Inversion of the 2nd Law: Make It Unattractive
2.4: Reframe your mind-set. Highlight the benefits of avoiding your bad habits.
Inversion of the 3rd Law: Make It Difficult
3.6: Increase friction. Increase the number of steps between you and your bad habits.
3.7: Use a commitment device. Restrict your future choices to the ones that benefit you.
Inversion of the 4th Law: Make It Unsatisfying
4.5: Get an accountability partner. Ask someone to watch your behavior.
 
4.6: Create a habit contract. Make the costs of your bad habits public and painful.
You can download a printable version of this habits cheat sheet at: atomichabits.com/cheatsheet
 
18
The Truth About Talent (When Genes Matter and When They Don’t)
ANY PEOPLE ARE familiar with Michael Phelps, who is widely considered to be one of the greatest athletes in history. Phelps has
won more Olympic medals not only than any swimmer but also more than any Olympian in any sport.
Fewer people know the name Hicham El Guerrouj, but he was a fantastic athlete in his own right. El Guerrouj is a Moroccan runner who holds two Olympic gold medals and is one of the greatest middle- distance runners of all time. For many years, he held the world record in the mile, 1,500-meter, and 2,000-meter races. At the Olympic Games in Athens, Greece, in 2004, he won gold in the 1,500-meter and 5,000-meter races.
These two athletes are wildly different in many ways. (For starters, one competed on land and the other in water.) But most notably, they differ significantly in height. El Guerrouj is five feet, nine inches tall. Phelps is six feet, four inches tall. Despite this seven-inch difference in height, the two men are identical in one respect: Michael Phelps and Hicham El Guerrouj wear the same length inseam on their pants.
How is this possible? Phelps has relatively short legs for his height and a very long torso, the perfect build for swimming. El Guerrouj has incredibly long legs and a short upper body, an ideal frame for distance running.
Now, imagine if these world-class athletes were to switch sports. Given his remarkable athleticism, could Michael Phelps become an Olympic-caliber distance runner with enough training? It’s unlikely. At
 
peak fitness, Phelps weighed 194 pounds, which is 40 percent heavier than El Guerrouj, who competed at an ultralight 138 pounds. Taller runners are heavier runners, and every extra pound is a curse when it comes to distance running. Against elite competition, Phelps would be doomed from the start.
Similarly, El Guerrouj might be one of the best runners in history, but it’s doubtful he would ever qualify for the Olympics as a swimmer. Since 1976, the average height of Olympic gold medalists in the men’s 1,500-meter run is five feet, ten inches. In comparison, the average height of Olympic gold medalists in the men’s 100-meter freestyle swim is six feet, four inches. Swimmers tend to be tall and have long backs and arms, which are ideal for pulling through the water. El Guerrouj would be at a severe disadvantage before he ever touched the pool.
The secret to maximizing your odds of success is to choose the right field of competition. This is just as true with habit change as it is with sports and business. Habits are easier to perform, and more satisfying to stick with, when they align with your natural inclinations and abilities. Like Michael Phelps in the pool or Hicham El Guerrouj on the track, you want to play a game where the odds are in your favor.
Embracing this strategy requires the acceptance of the simple truth that people are born with different abilities. Some people don’t like to discuss this fact. On the surface, your genes seem to be fixed, and it’s no fun to talk about things you cannot control. Plus, phrases like biological determinism makes it sound like certain individuals are destined for success and others doomed to failure. But this is a shortsighted view of the influence of genes on behavior.
The strength of genetics is also their weakness. Genes cannot be easily changed, which means they provide a powerful advantage in favorable circumstances and a serious disadvantage in unfavorable circumstances. If you want to dunk a basketball, being seven feet tall is very useful. If you want to perform a gymnastics routine, being seven feet tall is a great hindrance. Our environment determines the suitability of our genes and the utility of our natural talents. When our environment changes, so do the qualities that determine success.
This is true not just for physical characteristics but for mental ones as well. I’m smart if you ask me about habits and human behavior; not
 
so much when it comes to knitting, rocket propulsion, or guitar chords. Competence is highly dependent on context.
The people at the top of any competitive field are not only well trained, they are also well suited to the task. And this is why, if you want to be truly great, selecting the right place to focus is crucial.
In short: genes do not determine your destiny. They determine your areas of opportunity. As physician Gabor Mate notes, “Genes can predispose, but they don’t predetermine.” The areas where you are genetically predisposed to success are the areas where habits are more likely to be satisfying. The key is to direct your effort toward areas that both excite you and match your natural skills, to align your ambition with your ability.
The obvious question is, “How do I figure out where the odds are in my favor? How do I identify the opportunities and habits that are right for me?” The first place we will look for an answer is by understanding your personality.

HOW YOUR PERSONALITY INFLUENCES YOUR HABITS
Your genes are operating beneath the surface of every habit. Indeed, beneath the surface of every behavior. Genes have been shown to influence everything from the number of hours you spend watching television to your likelihood to marry or divorce to your tendency to get addicted to drugs, alcohol, or nicotine. There’s a strong genetic component to how obedient or rebellious you are when facing authority, how vulnerable or resistant you are to stressful events, how proactive or reactive you tend to be, and even how captivated or bored you feel during sensory experiences like attending a concert. As Robert Plomin, a behavioral geneticist at King’s College in London, told me, “It is now at the point where we have stopped testing to see if traits have a genetic component because we literally can’t find a single one that isn’t influenced by our genes.”
Bundled together, your unique cluster of genetic traits predispose you to a particular personality. Your personality is the set of characteristics that is consistent from situation to situation. The most proven scientific analysis of personality traits is known as the “Big Five,” which breaks them down into five spectrums of behavior.
 
1.	Openness to experience: from curious and inventive on one end to cautious and consistent on the other.
2.	Conscientiousness: organized and efficient to easygoing and spontaneous.
3.	Extroversion: outgoing and energetic to solitary and reserved (you likely know them as extroverts vs. introverts).
4.	Agreeableness: friendly and compassionate to challenging and detached.
5.	Neuroticism: anxious and sensitive to confident, calm, and stable.

All five characteristics have biological underpinnings. Extroversion, for instance, can be tracked from birth. If scientists play a loud noise in the nursing ward, some babies turn toward it while others turn away.
When the researchers tracked these children through life, they found that the babies who turned toward the noise were more likely to grow up to be extroverts. Those who turned away were more likely to become introverts.
People who are high in agreeableness are kind, considerate, and warm. They also tend to have higher natural oxytocin levels, a hormone that plays an important role in social bonding, increases feelings of trust, and can act as a natural antidepressant. You can easily imagine how someone with more oxytocin might be inclined to build habits like writing thank-you notes or organizing social events.
As a third example, consider neuroticism, which is a personality trait all people possess to various degrees. People who are high in neuroticism tend to be anxious and worry more than others. This trait has been linked to hypersensitivity of the amygdala, the portion of the brain responsible for noticing threats. In other words, people who are more sensitive to negative cues in their environment are more likely to score high in neuroticism.
Our habits are not solely determined by our personalities, but there is no doubt that our genes nudge us in a certain direction. Our deeply rooted preferences make certain behaviors easier for some people than for others. You don’t have to apologize for these differences or feel guilty about them, but you do have to work with them. A person who scores lower on conscientiousness, for example, will be less likely to be
 
orderly by nature and may need to rely more heavily on environment design to stick with good habits. (As a reminder for the less conscientious readers among us, environment design is a strategy we discussed in Chapters 6 and 12.)
The takeaway is that you should build habits that work for your personality.* People can get ripped working out like a bodybuilder, but if you prefer rock climbing or cycling or rowing, then shape your exercise habit around your interests. If your friend follows a low-carb diet but you find that low-fat works for you, then more power to you. If you want to read more, don’t be embarrassed if you prefer steamy romance novels over nonfiction. Read whatever fascinates you.* You don’t have to build the habits everyone tells you to build. Choose the habit that best suits you, not the one that is most popular.
There is a version of every habit that can bring you joy and satisfaction. Find it. Habits need to be enjoyable if they are going to stick. This is the core idea behind the 4th Law.
Tailoring your habits to your personality is a good start, but this is not the end of the story. Let’s turn our attention to finding and designing situations where you’re at a natural advantage.

HOW TO FIND A GAME WHERE THE ODDS ARE IN YOUR FAVOR
Learning to play a game where the odds are in your favor is critical for maintaining motivation and feeling successful. In theory, you can enjoy almost anything. In practice, you are more likely to enjoy the things that come easily to you. People who are talented in a particular area tend to be more competent at that task and are then praised for doing a good job. They stay energized because they are making progress where others have failed, and because they get rewarded with better pay and bigger opportunities, which not only makes them happier but also propels them to produce even higher-quality work. It’s a virtuous cycle.
Pick the right habit and progress is easy. Pick the wrong habit and life is a struggle.
How do you pick the right habit? The first step is something we covered in the 3rd Law: make it easy. In many cases, when people pick the wrong habit, it simply means they picked a habit that was too
 
difficult. When a habit is easy, you are more likely to be successful. When you are successful, you are more likely to feel satisfied. However, there is another level to consider. In the long-run, if you continue to advance and improve, any area can become challenging. At some point, you need to make sure you’re playing the right game for your skillset. How do you figure that out?
The most common approach is trial and error. Of course, there’s a problem with this strategy: life is short. You don’t have time to try every career, date every eligible bachelor, or play every musical instrument. Thankfully, there is an effective way to manage this conundrum, and it is known as the explore/exploit trade-off.
In the beginning of a new activity, there should be a period of exploration. In relationships, it’s called dating. In college, it’s called the liberal arts. In business, it’s called split testing. The goal is to try out many possibilities, research a broad range of ideas, and cast a wide net.
After this initial period of exploration, shift your focus to the best solution you’ve found—but keep experimenting occasionally. The proper balance depends on whether you’re winning or losing. If you are currently winning, you exploit, exploit, exploit. If you are currently losing, you continue to explore, explore, explore.
In the long-run it is probably most effective to work on the strategy that seems to deliver the best results about 80 to 90 percent of the time and keep exploring with the remaining 10 to 20 percent. Google famously asks employees to spend 80 percent of the workweek on their official job and 20 percent on projects of their choice, which has led to the creation of blockbuster products like AdWords and Gmail.
The optimal approach also depends on how much time you have. If you have a lot of time—like someone at the beginning of their career— it makes more sense to explore because once you find the right thing, you still have a good amount of time to exploit it. If you’re pressed for time—say, as you come up on the deadline for a project—you should implement the best solution you’ve found so far and get some results.
As you explore different options, there are a series of questions you can ask yourself to continually narrow in on the habits and areas that will be most satisfying to you:
What feels like fun to me, but work to others? The mark of whether you are made for a task is not whether you love it but
 
whether you can handle the pain of the task easier than most people. When are you enjoying yourself while other people are complaining? The work that hurts you less than it hurts others is the work you were made to do.
What makes me lose track of time? Flow is the mental state you enter when you are so focused on the task at hand that the rest of the world fades away. This blend of happiness and peak performance is what athletes and performers experience when they are “in the zone.” It is nearly impossible to experience a flow state and not find the task satisfying at least to some degree.
Where do I get greater returns than the average person? We are continually comparing ourselves to those around us, and a behavior is more likely to be satisfying when the comparison is in our favor. When I started writing at jamesclear.com, my email list grew very quickly. I wasn’t quite sure what I was doing well, but I knew that results seemed to be coming faster for me than for some of my colleagues, which motivated me to keep writing.
What comes naturally to me? For just a moment, ignore what you have been taught. Ignore what society has told you. Ignore what others expect of you. Look inside yourself and ask, “What feels natural to me? When have I felt alive? When have I felt like the real me?” No internal judgments or people-pleasing. No second-guessing or self-criticism. Just feelings of engagement and enjoyment. Whenever you feel authentic and genuine, you are headed in the right direction.
To be honest, some of this process is just luck. Michael Phelps and Hicham El Guerrouj were lucky to be born with a rare set of abilities that are highly valued by society and to be placed in the ideal environment for those abilities. We all have limited time on this planet, and the truly great among us are the ones who not only work hard but also have the good fortune to be exposed to opportunities that favor us.
But what if you don’t want to leave it up to luck?
If you can’t find a game where the odds are stacked in your favor, create one. Scott Adams, the cartoonist behind Dilbert, says, “Everyone has at least a few areas in which they could be in the top 25% with some effort. In my case, I can draw better than most people, but I’m hardly an artist. And I’m not any funnier than the average
 
standup comedian who never makes it big, but I’m funnier than most people. The magic is that few people can draw well and write jokes. It’s the combination of the two that makes what I do so rare. And when you add in my business background, suddenly I had a topic that few cartoonists could hope to understand without living it.”
When you can’t win by being better, you can win by being different.
By combining your skills, you reduce the level of competition, which makes it easier to stand out. You can shortcut the need for a genetic advantage (or for years of practice) by rewriting the rules. A good player works hard to win the game everyone else is playing. A great player creates a new game that favors their strengths and avoids their weaknesses.
In college, I designed my own major, biomechanics, which was a combination of physics, chemistry, biology, and anatomy. I wasn’t smart enough to stand out among the top physics or biology majors, so I created my own game. And because it suited me—I was only taking the courses I was interested in—studying felt like less of a chore. It was also easier to avoid the trap of comparing myself to everyone else. After all, nobody else was taking the same combination of classes, so who could say if they were better or worse?
Specialization is a powerful way to overcome the “accident” of bad genetics. The more you master a specific skill, the harder it becomes for others to compete with you. Many bodybuilders are stronger than the average arm wrestler, but even a massive bodybuilder may lose at arm wrestling because the arm wrestling champ has very specific strength. Even if you’re not the most naturally gifted, you can often win by being the best in a very narrow category.
Boiling water will soften a potato but harden an egg. You can’t control whether you’re a potato or an egg, but you can decide to play a game where it’s better to be hard or soft. If you can find a more favorable environment, you can transform the situation from one where the odds are against you to one where they are in your favor.

HOW TO GET THE MOST OUT OF YOUR GENES
Our genes do not eliminate the need for hard work. They clarify it. They tell us what to work hard on. Once we realize our strengths, we know where to spend our time and energy. We know which types of
 
opportunities to look for and which types of challenges to avoid. The better we understand our nature, the better our strategy can be.
Biological differences matter. Even so, it’s more productive to focus on whether you are fulfilling your own potential than comparing yourself to someone else. The fact that you have a natural limit to any specific ability has nothing to do with whether you are reaching the ceiling of your capabilities. People get so caught up in the fact that they have limits that they rarely exert the effort required to get close to them.
Furthermore, genes can’t make you successful if you’re not doing the work. Yes, it’s possible that the ripped trainer at the gym has better genes, but if you haven’t put in the same reps, it’s impossible to say if you have been dealt a better or worse genetic hand. Until you work as hard as those you admire, don’t explain away their success as luck.
In summary, one of the best ways to ensure your habits remain satisfying over the long-run is to pick behaviors that align with your personality and skills. Work hard on the things that come easy.

Chapter Summary
  The secret to maximizing your odds of success is to choose the right field of competition.
  Pick the right habit and progress is easy. Pick the wrong habit and life is a struggle.
  Genes cannot be easily changed, which means they provide a powerful advantage in favorable circumstances and a serious disadvantage in unfavorable circumstances.
  Habits are easier when they align with your natural abilities.
Choose the habits that best suit you.
  Play a game that favors your strengths. If you can’t find a game that favors you, create one.
  Genes do not eliminate the need for hard work. They clarify it.
They tell us what to work hard on.
 

19
The Goldilocks Rule: How to Stay Motivated in Life and Work
N 1955, Disneyland had just opened in Anaheim, California, when a ten-year-old boy walked in and asked for a job. Labor laws were
loose back then and the boy managed to land a position selling guidebooks for $0.50 apiece.
Within a year, he had transitioned to Disney’s magic shop, where he learned tricks from the older employees. He experimented with jokes and tried out simple routines on visitors. Soon he discovered that what he loved was not performing magic but performing in general. He set his sights on becoming a comedian.
Beginning in his teenage years, he started performing in little clubs around Los Angeles. The crowds were small and his act was short. He was rarely on stage for more than five minutes. Most of the people in the crowd were too busy drinking or talking with friends to pay attention. One night, he literally delivered his stand-up routine to an empty club.
It wasn’t glamorous work, but there was no doubt he was getting better. His first routines would only last one or two minutes. By high school, his material had expanded to include a five-minute act and, a few years later, a ten-minute show. At nineteen, he was performing weekly for twenty minutes at a time. He had to read three poems during the show just to make the routine long enough, but his skills continued to progress.
He spent another decade experimenting, adjusting, and practicing. He took a job as a television writer and, gradually, he was able to land
 
his own appearances on talk shows. By the mid-1970s, he had worked his way into being a regular guest on The Tonight Show and Saturday Night Live.
Finally, after nearly fifteen years of work, the young man rose to fame. He toured sixty cities in sixty-three days. Then seventy-two cities in eighty days. Then eighty-five cities in ninety days. He had 18,695 people attend one show in Ohio. Another 45,000 tickets were sold for his three-day show in New York. He catapulted to the top of his genre and became one of the most successful comedians of his time.
His name is Steve Martin.
Martin’s story offers a fascinating perspective on what it takes to stick with habits for the long run. Comedy is not for the timid. It is hard to imagine a situation that would strike fear into the hearts of more people than performing alone on stage and failing to get a single laugh. And yet Steve Martin faced this fear every week for eighteen years. In his words, “10 years spent learning, 4 years spent refining, and 4 years as a wild success.”
Why is it that some people, like Martin, stick with their habits— whether practicing jokes or drawing cartoons or playing guitar—while most of us struggle to stay motivated? How do we design habits that pull us in rather than ones that fade away? Scientists have been studying this question for many years. While there is still much to learn, one of the most consistent findings is that the way to maintain motivation and achieve peak levels of desire is to work on tasks of “just manageable difficulty.”
The human brain loves a challenge, but only if it is within an optimal zone of difficulty. If you love tennis and try to play a serious match against a four-year-old, you will quickly become bored. It’s too easy. You’ll win every point. In contrast, if you play a professional tennis player like Roger Federer or Serena Williams, you will quickly lose motivation because the match is too difficult.
Now consider playing tennis against someone who is your equal. As the game progresses, you win a few points and you lose a few. You have a good chance of winning, but only if you really try. Your focus narrows, distractions fade away, and you find yourself fully invested in the task at hand. This is a challenge of just manageable difficulty and it is a prime example of the Goldilocks Rule.
 
The Goldilocks Rule states that humans experience peak motivation when working on tasks that are right on the edge of their current abilities. Not too hard. Not too easy. Just right.

THE GOLDILOCKS RULE


FIGURE 15: Maximum motivation occurs when facing a challenge of just manageable difficulty. In psychology research this is known as the Yerkes– Dodson law, which describes the optimal level of arousal as the midpoint between boredom and anxiety.

Martin’s comedy career is an excellent example of the Goldilocks Rule in practice. Each year, he expanded his comedy routine—but only by a minute or two. He was always adding new material, but he also kept a few jokes that were guaranteed to get laughs. There were just enough victories to keep him motivated and just enough mistakes to keep him working hard.
When you’re starting a new habit, it’s important to keep the behavior as easy as possible so you can stick with it even when conditions aren’t perfect. This is an idea we covered in detail while discussing the 3rd Law of Behavior Change.
 
Once a habit has been established, however, it’s important to continue to advance in small ways. These little improvements and new challenges keep you engaged. And if you hit the Goldilocks Zone just right, you can achieve a flow state.*
A flow state is the experience of being “in the zone” and fully immersed in an activity. Scientists have tried to quantify this feeling. They found that to achieve a state of flow, a task must be roughly 4 percent beyond your current ability. In real life it’s typically not feasible to quantify the difficulty of an action in this way, but the core idea of the Goldilocks Rule remains: working on challenges of just manageable difficulty—something on the perimeter of your ability— seems crucial for maintaining motivation.
Improvement requires a delicate balance. You need to regularly search for challenges that push you to your edge while continuing to make enough progress to stay motivated. Behaviors need to remain novel in order for them to stay attractive and satisfying. Without variety, we get bored. And boredom is perhaps the greatest villain on the quest for self-improvement.

HOW TO STAY FOCUSED WHEN YOU GET BORED WORKING ON YOUR GOALS
After my baseball career ended, I was looking for a new sport. I joined a weightlifting team and one day an elite coach visited our gym. He had worked with thousands of athletes during his long career, including a few Olympians. I introduced myself and we began talking about the process of improvement.
“What’s the difference between the best athletes and everyone else?” I asked. “What do the really successful people do that most don’t?”
He mentioned the factors you might expect: genetics, luck, talent.
But then he said something I wasn’t expecting: “At some point it comes down to who can handle the boredom of training every day, doing the same lifts over and over and over.”
His answer surprised me because it’s a different way of thinking about work ethic. People talk about getting “amped up” to work on their goals. Whether it’s business or sports or art, you hear people say things like, “It all comes down to passion.” Or, “You have to really want
 
it.” As a result, many of us get depressed when we lose focus or motivation because we think that successful people have some bottomless reserve of passion. But this coach was saying that really successful people feel the same lack of motivation as everyone else. The difference is that they still find a way to show up despite the feelings of boredom.
Mastery requires practice. But the more you practice something, the more boring and routine it becomes. Once the beginner gains have been made and we learn what to expect, our interest starts to fade.
Sometimes it happens even faster than that. All you have to do is hit the gym a few days in a row or publish a couple of blog posts on time and letting one day slip doesn’t feel like much. Things are going well. It’s easy to rationalize taking a day off because you’re in a good place.
The greatest threat to success is not failure but boredom. We get bored with habits because they stop delighting us. The outcome becomes expected. And as our habits become ordinary, we start derailing our progress to seek novelty. Perhaps this is why we get caught up in a never-ending cycle, jumping from one workout to the next, one diet to the next, one business idea to the next. As soon as we experience the slightest dip in motivation, we begin seeking a new strategy—even if the old one was still working. As Machiavelli noted, “Men desire novelty to such an extent that those who are doing well wish for a change as much as those who are doing badly.”
Perhaps this is why many of the most habit-forming products are those that provide continuous forms of novelty. Video games provide visual novelty. Porn provides sexual novelty. Junk foods provide culinary novelty. Each of these experiences offer continual elements of surprise.
In psychology, this is known as a variable reward.* Slot machines are the most common real-world example. A gambler hits the jackpot every now and then but not at any predictable interval. The pace of rewards varies. This variance leads to the greatest spike of dopamine, enhances memory recall, and accelerates habit formation.
Variable rewards won’t create a craving—that is, you can’t take a reward people are uninterested in, give it to them at a variable interval, and hope it will change their mind—but they are a powerful way to amplify the cravings we already experience because they reduce boredom.
 
The sweet spot of desire occurs at a 50/50 split between success and failure. Half of the time you get what you want. Half of the time you don’t. You need just enough “winning” to experience satisfaction and just enough “wanting” to experience desire. This is one of the benefits of following the Goldilocks Rule. If you’re already interested in a habit, working on challenges of just manageable difficulty is a good way to keep things interesting.
Of course, not all habits have a variable reward component, and you wouldn’t want them to. If Google only delivered a useful search result some of the time, I would switch to a competitor pretty quickly. If Uber only picked up half of my trips, I doubt I’d be using that service much longer. And if I flossed my teeth each night and only sometimes ended up with a clean mouth, I think I’d skip it.
Variable rewards or not, no habit will stay interesting forever. At some point, everyone faces the same challenge on the journey of self- improvement: you have to fall in love with boredom.
We all have goals that we would like to achieve and dreams that we would like to fulfill, but it doesn’t matter what you are trying to become better at, if you only do the work when it’s convenient or exciting, then you’ll never be consistent enough to achieve remarkable results.
I can guarantee that if you manage to start a habit and keep sticking to it, there will be days when you feel like quitting. When you start a business, there will be days when you don’t feel like showing up. When you’re at the gym, there will be sets that you don’t feel like finishing.
When it’s time to write, there will be days that you don’t feel like typing. But stepping up when it’s annoying or painful or draining to do so, that’s what makes the difference between a professional and an amateur.
Professionals stick to the schedule; amateurs let life get in the way. Professionals know what is important to them and work toward it with purpose; amateurs get pulled off course by the urgencies of life.
David Cain, an author and meditation teacher, encourages his students to avoid being “fair-weather meditators.” Similarly, you don’t want to be a fair-weather athlete or a fair-weather writer or a fair- weather anything. When a habit is truly important to you, you have to be willing to stick to it in any mood. Professionals take action even
 
when the mood isn’t right. They might not enjoy it, but they find a way to put the reps in.
There have been a lot of sets that I haven’t felt like finishing, but I’ve never regretted doing the workout. There have been a lot of articles I haven’t felt like writing, but I’ve never regretted publishing on schedule. There have been a lot of days I’ve felt like relaxing, but I’ve never regretted showing up and working on something that was important to me.
The only way to become excellent is to be endlessly fascinated by doing the same thing over and over. You have to fall in love with boredom.

Chapter Summary
The Goldilocks Rule states that humans experience peak motivation when working on tasks that are right on the edge of their current abilities.
The greatest threat to success is not failure but boredom.
As habits become routine, they become less interesting and less satisfying. We get bored.
Anyone can work hard when they feel motivated. It’s the ability to keep going when work isn’t exciting that makes the difference.
Professionals stick to the schedule; amateurs let life get in the way.
 

20
The Downside of Creating Good Habits
ABITS CREATE THE FOUNDATION FOR MASTERY. In chess, it is only after the basic movements of the pieces have become automatic that a
player can focus on the next level of the game. Each chunk of information that is memorized opens up the mental space for more effortful thinking. This is true for any endeavor. When you know the simple movements so well that you can perform them without thinking, you are free to pay attention to more advanced details. In this way, habits are the backbone of any pursuit of excellence.
However, the benefits of habits come at a cost. At first, each repetition develops fluency, speed, and skill. But then, as a habit becomes automatic, you become less sensitive to feedback. You fall into mindless repetition. It becomes easier to let mistakes slide. When you can do it “good enough” on autopilot, you stop thinking about how to do it better.
The upside of habits is that we can do things without thinking. The downside of habits is that you get used to doing things a certain way and stop paying attention to little errors. You assume you’re getting better because you’re gaining experience. In reality, you are merely reinforcing your current habits—not improving them. In fact, some research has shown that once a skill has been mastered there is usually a slight decline in performance over time.
Usually, this minor dip in performance is no cause for worry. You don’t need a system to continuously improve how well you brush your teeth or tie your shoes or make your morning cup of tea. With habits like these, good enough is usually good enough. The less energy you
 
spend on trivial choices, the more you can spend it on what really matters.
However, when you want to maximize your potential and achieve elite levels of performance, you need a more nuanced approach. You can’t repeat the same things blindly and expect to become exceptional. Habits are necessary, but not sufficient for mastery. What you need is a combination of automatic habits and deliberate practice.
Habits + Deliberate Practice = Mastery
To become great, certain skills do need to become automatic.
Basketball players need to be able to dribble without thinking before they can move on to mastering layups with their nondominant hand. Surgeons need to repeat the first incision so many times that they could do it with their eyes closed, so that they can focus on the hundreds of variables that arise during surgery. But after one habit has been mastered, you have to return to the effortful part of the work and begin building the next habit.
Mastery is the process of narrowing your focus to a tiny element of success, repeating it until you have internalized the skill, and then using this new habit as the foundation to advance to the next frontier of your development. Old tasks become easier the second time around, but it doesn’t get easier overall because now you’re pouring your energy into the next challenge. Each habit unlocks the next level of performance. It’s an endless cycle.

How To Win Friends & Influence People
REVISED EDITION
DALE CARNEGIE
Editorial Consultant: Dorothy Carnegie
Editorial Assistance: Arthur R. Pell, Ph.D.
SIMON AND SCHUSTER
NEW YORK
Copyright 1936 by Dale Carnegie, copyright renewed © 1964 by Donna Dale Carnegie and Dorothy Carnegie
Revised Edition copyright © 1981 by Donna Dale Carnegie and Dorothy Carnegie
All rights reserved including the right of reproduction in whole or in part in any form
Published by Simon and Schuster
A Division of Gulf & Western Corporation
Simon & Schuster Building
Rockefeller Center
1230 Avenue of the Americas
New York, New York 10020
SIMON AND SCHUSTER and colophon are trademarks of Simon & Schuster
Designed by Stanley S. Drate
Manufactured in the United States of America
17 19 20 18
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Carnegie, Dale, 1888-1955.
How to win friends and influence people.
Includes index.
1. Success. I. Title.
BF637.S8C37 1981 158’. 1 80-28759
ISBN O-671-42517-X
EIGHT THINGS THIS BOOK WILL HELP YOU ACHIEVE
1. Get out of a mental rut, think new thoughts, acquire new visions, discover new ambitions.
2. Make friends quickly and easily.
3. Increase your popularity.
4. Win people to your way of thinking.
5. Increase your influence, your prestige, your ability to get things done.
6. Handle complaints, avoid arguments, keep your human contacts smooth and pleasant.
7. Become a better speaker, a more entertaining conversationalist.
8. Arouse enthusiasm among your associates.
This book has done all these things for more than ten million readers in thirty-six languages.
This Book Is Dedicated to a Man
Who Doesn’t Need to Read It:
My Cherished Friend
HOMER CROY
1
Content
Preface To Revised Edition……………………………………………………………….. 4
How The Book Was Written—And Why………………………………………….……... 5
Nine Suggestions On How To Get The Best Of This Book……………………………… 8
Part One: Fundamental Techniques In Handling People
1: If you want to gather honey, don't kick over the beehive.……………………………... 11
2: The big secret of dealing with people………………………….………………………. 18
3: He who can do this has the whole world with him. He who cannot walks a lonely way 24
Part Two: Six Ways To Make People Like You
4: Do this and you'll be welcome anywhere………………….…………………………... 34
5: A simple way to make a good impression……………………………………………... 40
6: If you don't do this, you are headed for trouble…………………………………….….. 44
7: An easy way to become a good conversationalist……………………………………… 48
8: How to interest people…………………………………………………………………. 53
9: How to make people like you instantly.…………………………………………….….. 56
Part Three: How To Win People To Your Way Of Thinking
10: You can’t win an argument…………………………………………………………… 63
11: A sure way of making enemies—and how to avoid it………………………………... 67
12: If you're wrong, admit it……………………………….……………………………… 72
13: A drop of honey……………………………………………………..………………... 76
14: The secret of Socrates……………………………………………………….………... 80
15: The safety valve in handling complaints…………………….……………………….. 83
16: How To Get Cooperation……………………………………………………………... 86
17: A formula that will work wonders for you.………………………….……………….. 89
18: What everybody wants………………………………………………………………... 92
2
19: An appeal that everybody likes……………………………………………………….. 96
20: The movies do it. TV does it. Why don't you do it?………………………….………. 99
21: When nothing else works, try this……………………………………………….……. 102
Part 4: Be A Leader: How To Change People Without Giving Offence Or Arousing
Resentment
22: If you must find fault, this is the way to begin……………………………………….. 106
23: How to criticize—and not be hated for it…………………………….……………….. 109
24: A talk about your own mistakes first…………………………………………………. 111
25: No one likes to take orders. …………………………………………………………... 114
26: Let the other person save face………………………………………………………… 116
27: How to spur people on to success……………………………….……………………. 118
28: Give a dog a good name………………………………………………………………. 121
29: Make the fault seem easy to correct.………………………………………………….. 123
30: Making people glad to do what you want…………………………………………….. 125
A Shortcut To Distinction………………………………………………………….……... 128
3
Preface To Revised Edition
How to Win Friends and Influence People was first published in 1937 in an edition of only five
thousand copies. Neither Dale Carnegie nor the publishers, Simon and Schuster, anticipated more than this
modest sale. To their amazement, the book became an overnight sensation, and edition after edition rolled off
the presses to keep up with the increasing public demand. How to Win Friends and Influence People took its
place in publishing history as one of the all-time international bestsellers. It touched a nerve and filled a human
need that was more than a faddish phenomenon of post-Depression days, as evidenced by its continued and
uninterrupted sales into the eighties, almost half a century later.
Dale Carnegie used to say that it was easier to make a million dollars than to put a phrase into the
English language. How to Win Friends and Influence People became such a phrase, quoted, paraphrased,
parodied, used in innumerable contexts from political cartoon to novels. The book itself was translated into
almost every known written language. Each generation has discovered it anew and has found it relevant.
Which brings us to the logical question: Why revise a book that has proven and continues to prove its
vigorous and universal appeal? Why tamper with success?
To answer that, we must realize that Dale Carnegie himself was a tireless reviser of his own work
during his lifetime. How to Win Friends and Influence People was written to be used as a textbook for his
courses in Effective Speaking and Human Relations and is still used in those courses today. Until his death in
1955 he constantly improved and revised the course itself to make it applicable to the evolving needs of an evergrowing public. No one was more sensitive to the changing currents of present-day life than Dale Carnegie. He
constantly improved and refined his methods of teaching; he updated his book on Effective Speaking several
times. Had he lived longer, he himself would have revised How to Win Friends and Influence People to better
reflect the changes that have taken place in the world since the thirties.
Many of the names of prominent people in the book, well known at the time of first publication, are no
longer recognized by many of today’s readers. Certain examples and phrases seem as quaint and dated in our
social climate as those in a Victorian novel. The important message and overall impact of the book is weakened
to that extent.
Our purpose, therefore, in this revision is to clarify and strengthen the book for a modern reader
without tampering with the content. We have not “changed” How to Win Friends and Influence People except to
make a few excisions and add a few more contemporary examples. The brash, breezy Carnegie style is intact—
even the thirties slang is still there. Dale Carnegie wrote as he spoke, in an intensively exuberant, colloquial,
conversational manner.
So his voice still speaks as forcefully as ever, in the book and in his work. Thousands of people all over
the world are being trained in Carnegie courses in increasing numbers each year. And other thousands are
reading and studying How to Win Friends and lnfluence People and being inspired to use its principles to better
their lives. To all of them, we offer this revision in the spirit of the honing and polishing of a finely made tool.
– Dorothy Carnegie
(Mrs. Dale Carnegie)
4
How This Book Was Written—And Why
During the first thirty-five years of the twentieth century, the publishing houses of America printed
more than a fifth of a million different books. Most of them were deadly dull, and many were financial failures.
“Many,” did I say? The president of one of the largest publishing houses in the world confessed to me that his
company, after seventy-five years of publishing experience, still lost money on seven out of every eight books it
published.
Why, then, did I have the temerity to write another book? And, after I had written it, why should you
bother to read it?
Fair questions, both; and I’ll try to answer them.
I have, since 1912, been conducting educational courses for business and professional men and women
in New York. At first, I conducted courses in public speaking only—courses designed to train adults, by actual
experience, to think on their feet and express their ideas with more clarity, more effectiveness and more poise,
both in business interviews and before groups.
But gradually, as the seasons passed, I realized that as sorely as these adults needed training in effective
speaking, they needed still more training in the fine art of getting along with people in everyday business and
social contacts.
I also gradually realized that I was sorely in need of such training myself. As I look back across the
years, I am appalled at my own frequent lack of finesse and understanding. How I wish a book such as this had
been placed in my hands twenty years ago! What a priceless boon it would have been.
Dealing with people is probably the biggest problem you face, especially if you are in business. Yes,
and that is also true if you are a housewife, architect or engineer. Research done a few years ago under the
auspices of the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching uncovered a most important and
significant fact—a fact later confirmed by additional studies made at the Carnegie Institute of Technology.
These investigations revealed that even in such technical lines as engineering, about 15 percent of one’s
financial success is due to one’s technical knowledge and about 85 percent is due to skill in human engineering,
to personality and the ability to lead people.
For many years, I conducted courses each season at the Engineers’ Club of Philadelphia, and also
courses for the New York Chapter of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers. A total of probably more
than fifteen hundred engineers have passed through my classes. They came to me because they had finally
realized, after years of observation and experience, that the highest-paid personnel in engineering are frequently
not those who know the most about engineering. One can for example, hire mere technical ability in
engineering, accountancy, architecture or any other profession at nominal salaries. But the person who has
technical knowledge plus the ability to express ideas, to assume leadership, and to arouse enthusiasm among
people—that person is headed for higher earning power.
In the heyday of his activity, John D. Rockefeller said that “the ability to deal with people is as
purchasable a commodity as sugar or coffee.” “And I will pay more for that ability,” said John D., “than for any
other under the sun.”
Wouldn’t you suppose that every college in the land would conduct courses to develop the highestpriced ability under the sun? But if there is just one practical, commonsense course of that kind given for adults
in even one college in the land, it has escaped my attention up to the present writing.
The University of Chicago and the United Y.M.C.A. Schools conducted a survey to determine what
adults want to study.
That survey cost $25,000 and took two years. The last part of the survey was made in Meriden,
Connecticut. It had been chosen as a typical American town. Every adult in Meriden was interviewed and
requested to answer 156 questions—questions such as “What is your business or profession? Your education?
How do you spend your spare time? What is your income? Your hobbies? Your ambitions? Your problems?
What subjects are you most interested in studying?” And so on. That survey revealed that health is the prime
5
interest of adults and that their second interest is people; how to understand and get along with people; how to
make people like you; and how to win others to your way of thinking.
So the committee conducting this survey resolved to conduct such a course for adults in Meriden. They
searched diligently for a practical textbook on the subject and found not one. Finally they approached one of the
world’s outstanding authorities on adult education and asked him if he knew of any book that met the needs of
this group. “No,” he replied, "I know what those adults want. But the book they need has never been written.”
I knew from experience that this statement was true, for I myself had been searching for years to
discover a practical, working handbook on human relations.
Since no such book existed, I have tried to write one for use in my own courses. And here it is. I hope
you like it.
In preparation for this book, I read everything that I could find on the subject—everything from
newspaper columns, magazine articles, records of the family courts, the writings of the old philosophers and the
new psychologists. In addition, I hired a trained researcher to spend one and a half years in various libraries
reading everything I had missed, plowing through erudite tomes on psychology, poring over hundreds of
magazine articles, searching through countless biographies, trying to ascertain how the great leaders of all ages
had dealt with people. We read their biographies; we read the life stories of all great leaders from Julius Caesar
to Thomas Edison. I recall that we read over one hundred biographies of Theodore Roosevelt alone. We were
determined to spare no time, no expense, to discover every practical idea that anyone had ever used throughout
the ages for winning friends and influencing people.
I personally interviewed scores of successful people, some of them world-famous inventors like
Marconi and Edison; political leaders like Franklin D. Roosevelt and James Farley; business leaders like Owen
D. Young; movie stars like Clark Gable and Mary Pickford, and explorers like Martin Johnson, and tried to
discover the techniques they used in human relations.
From all this material, I prepared a short talk. I called it “How to Win Friends and Influence People”. I
say “short.” It was short in the beginning, but it soon expanded to a lecture that consumed one hour and thirty
minutes. For years, I gave this talk each season to the adults in the Carnegie Institute courses in New York.
I gave the talk and urged the listeners to go out and test it in their business and social contacts, and then
come back to class and speak about their experiences and the results they had achieved. What an interesting
assignment! These men and women, hungry for self-improvement, were fascinated by the idea of working in a
new kind of laboratory—the first and only laboratory of human relationships for adults that had ever existed.
This book wasn’t written in the usual sense of the word. It grew as a child grows. It grew and
developed out of that laboratory, out of the experiences of thousands of adults.
Years ago, we started with a set of rules printed on a card no larger than a postcard. The next season we
printed a larger card, then a leaflet, then a series of booklets, each one expanding in size and scope. After fifteen
years of experiment and research came this book.
The rules we have set down here are not mere theories or guesswork. They work like magic. Incredible
as it sounds, I have seen the application of these principles literally revolutionize the lives of many people.
To illustrate: A man with 314 employees joined one of these courses. For years, he had driven and
criticized and condemned his employees without stint or discretion. Kindness, words of appreciation and
encouragement were alien to his lips. After studying the principles discussed in this book, this employer sharply
altered his philosophy of life. His organization is now inspired with a new loyalty, a new enthusiasm, a new
spirit of teamwork. Three hundred and fourteen enemies have been turned into 314 friends. As he proudly said
in a speech before the class: “When I used to walk through my establishment, no one greeted me. My employees
actually looked the other way when they saw me approaching. But now they are all my friends and even the
janitor calls me by my first name.”
This employer gained more profit, more leisure and—what is infinitely more important—he found far
more happiness in his business and in his home.
6
Countless numbers of salespeople have sharply increased their sales by the use of these principles.
Many have opened up new accounts—accounts that they had formerly solicited in vain. Executives have been
given increased authority, increased pay. One executive reported a large increase in salary because he applied
these truths. Another, an executive in the Philadelphia Gas Works Company, was slated for demotion when he
was sixty-five because of his belligerence, because of his inability to lead people skillfully. This training not
only saved him from the demotion but brought him a promotion with increased pay.
On innumerable occasions, spouses attending the banquet given at the end of the course have told me
that their homes have been much happier since their husbands or wives started this training.
People are frequently astonished at the new results they achieve. It all seems like magic. In some cases,
in their enthusiasm, they have telephoned me at my home on Sundays because they couldn’t wait forty-eight
hours to report their achievements at the regular session of the course.
One man was so stirred by a talk on these principles that he sat far into the night discussing them with
other members of the class. At three o’clock in the morning, the others went home. But he was so shaken by a
realization of his own mistakes, so inspired by the vista of a new and richer world opening before him, that he
was unable to sleep. He didn’t sleep that night or the next day or the next night.
Who was he? A naive, untrained individual ready to gush over any new theory that came along? No, far
from it. He was a sophisticated, blasé dealer in art, very much the man about town, who spoke three languages
fluently and was a graduate of two European universities.
While writing this chapter, I received a letter from a German of the old school, an aristocrat whose
forebears had served for generations as professional army officers under the Hohenzollerns. His letter, written
from a transatlantic steamer, telling about the application of these principles, rose almost to a religious fervor.
Another man, an old New Yorker, a Harvard graduate, a wealthy man, the owner of a large carpet
factory, declared he had learned more in fourteen weeks through this system of training about the fine art of
influencing people than he had learned about the same subject during his four years in college. Absurd?
Laughable? Fantastic? Of course, you are privileged to dismiss this statement with whatever adjective you wish.
I am merely reporting, without comment, a declaration made by a conservative and eminently successful
Harvard graduate in a public address to approximately six hundred people at the Yale Club in New York on the
evening of Thursday, February 23, 1933.
“Compared to what we ought to be,” said the famous Professor William James of Harvard, “compared
to what we ought to be, we are only half awake. We are making use of only a small part of our physical and
mental resources. Stating the thing broadly, the human individual thus lives far within his limits. He possesses
powers of various sorts which he habitually fails to use.”
Those powers which you “habitually fail to use”! The sole purpose of this book is to help you discover,
develop and profit by those dormant and unused assets.
“Education,” said Dr. John G. Hibben, former president of Princeton University, “is the ability to meet
life’s situations.”
If by the time you have finished reading the first three chapters of this book, if you aren’t then a little
better equipped to meet life’s situations, then I shall consider this book to be a total failure so far as you are
concerned.
“For the great aim of education,” said Herbert Spencer, “is not knowledge but action.”
And this is an action book.
– Dale Carnegie
1936
7
Nine Suggestions On How To Get The Most Out Of This Book
1. If you wish to get the most out of this book, there is one indispensable requirement, one essential infinitely
more important than any rule or technique. Unless you have this one fundamental requisite, a thousand rules
on how to study will avail little, and if you do have this cardinal endowment, then you can achieve wonders
without reading any suggestions for getting the most out of a book.
What is this magic requirement? Just this: a deep, driving desire to learn, a vigorous determination to
increase your ability to deal with people.
How can you develop such an urge? By constantly reminding yourself how important these principles are to
you. Picture to yourself how their mastery will aid you in leading a richer, fuller, happier and more
fulfilling life. Say to yourself over and over: “My popularity, my happiness and sense of worth depend to no
small extent upon my skill in dealing with people.”
2. Read each chapter rapidly at first to get a bird’s-eye view of it. You will probably be tempted then to rush
on to the next one. But don’t, unless you are reading merely for entertainment. But if you are reading
because you want to increase your skill in human relations, then go back and reread each chapter
thoroughly. In the long run, this will mean saving time and getting results.
3. Stop frequently in your reading to think over what you are reading. Ask yourself just how and when you
can apply each suggestion.
4. Read with a crayon, pencil, pen, magic marker or highlighter in your hand. When you come across a
suggestion that you feel you can use, draw a line beside it. If it is a four-star suggestion, then underscore
every sentence or highlight it, or mark it with “****”. Marking and underscoring a book makes it more
interesting, and far easier to review rapidly.
5. I knew a woman who had been office manager for a large insurance concern for fifteen years. Every month,
she read all the insurance contracts her company had issued that month. Yes, she read many of the same
contracts over month after month, year after year. Why? Because experience had taught her that that was
the only way she could keep their provisions clearly in mind.
I once spent almost two years writing a book on public speaking and yet I found I had to keep going back
over it from time to time in order to remember what I had written in my own book. The rapidity with which
we forget is astonishing.
So, if you want to get a real, lasting benefit out of this book, don’t imagine that skimming through it once
will suffice. After reading it thoroughly, you ought to spend a few hours reviewing it every month. Keep it
on your desk in front of you every day. Glance through it often. Keep constantly impressing yourself with
the rich possibilities for improvement that still lie in the offing. Remember that the use of these principles
can be made habitual only by a constant and vigorous campaign of review and application. There is no
other way.
6. Bernard Shaw once remarked, “If you teach a man anything, he will never learn.” Shaw was right. Learning
is an active process. We learn by doing. So, if you desire to master the principles you are studying in this
book, do something about them. Apply these rules at every opportunity. If you don’t you will forget them
quickly. Only knowledge that is used sticks in your mind.
You will probably find it difficult to apply these suggestions all the time. I know because I wrote the book,
and yet frequently I found it difficult to apply everything I advocated. For example, when you are
displeased, it is much easier to criticize and condemn than it is to try to understand the other person’s
viewpoint. It is frequently easier to find fault than to find praise. It is more natural to talk about what you
want than to talk about what the other person wants and so on. So, as you read this book, remember that you
are not merely trying to acquire information. You are attempting to form new habits. Ah yes, you are
attempting a new way of life. That will require time and persistence and daily application.
So refer to these pages often. Regard this as a working handbook on human relations; and whenever you are
confronted with some specific problem—such as handling a child, winning your spouse to your way of
8
thinking, or satisfying an irritated customer—hesitate about doing the natural thing, the impulsive thing.
This is usually wrong. Instead, turn to these pages and review the paragraphs you have underscored. Then
try these new ways and watch them achieve magic for you.
7. Offer your spouse, your child or some business associate a dime or a dollar every time he or she catches
you violating a certain principle. Make a lively game out of mastering these rules.
8. The president of an important Wall Street bank once described, in a talk before one of my classes, a highly
efficient system he used for self-improvement. This man had little formal schooling; yet he had become one
of the most important financiers in America, and he confessed that he owed most of his success to the
constant application of his homemade system. This is what he does and I’ll put it in his own words as
accurately as I can remember.
“For years I have kept an engagement book showing all the appointments I had during the day. My family
never made any plans for me on Saturday night, for the family knew that I devoted a part of each Saturday
evening to the illuminating process of self-examination and review and appraisal. After dinner I went off by
myself, opened my engagement book, and thought over all the interviews, discussions and meetings that
had taken place during the week. I asked myself: ‘What mistakes did I make that time?’ ‘What did I do that
was right, and in what way could I have improved my performance?’ ‘What lessons can I learn from that
experience?’
“I often found that this weekly review made me very unhappy. I was frequently astonished at my own
blunders. Of course, as the years passed, these blunders became less frequent. Sometimes I was inclined to
pat myself on the back a little after one of these sessions. This system of self-analysis, self-education,
continued year after year, did more for me than any other one thing I have ever attempted.
“It helped me improve my ability to make decisions and it aided me enormously in all my contacts with
people. I cannot recommend it too highly.”
Why not use a similar system to check up on your application of the principles discussed in this book? If
you do, two things will result.
First, you will find yourself engaged in an educational process that is both intriguing and priceless. Second,
you will find that your ability to meet and deal with people will grow enormously.
9. You will find at the end of this book several blank pages on which you should record your triumphs in the
application of these principles. Be specific. Give names, dates, results. Keeping such a record will inspire
you to greater efforts; and how fascinating these entries will be when you chance upon them some evening
years from now!
In order to get the most out of this book:
a. Develop a deep, driving desire to master the principles of human relations.
b. Read each chapter twice before going on to the next one.
c. As you read, stop frequently to ask yourself how you can apply each suggestion.
d. Underscore each important idea.
e. Review this book each month.
f. Apply these principles at every opportunity. Use this volume as a working handbook to help you solve
your daily problems.
g. Make a lively game out of your learning by offering some friend a dime or a dollar every time he or she
catches you violating one of these principles.
h. Check up each week on the progress you are making. Ask yourself what mistakes you have made, what
improvement, what lessons you have learned for the future.
i. Keep notes in the back of this book showing how and when you have applied these principles.
9
PART ONE
Fundamental Techniques In Handling People
10
1
“IF YOU WANT TO GATHER HONEY, DON’T KICK OVER
THE BEEHIVE.”
On May 7, 1931, the most sensational manhunt New York City had ever known had come to its climax.
After weeks of search, “Two Gun” Crowley—the killer, the gunman who didn’t smoke or drink—was at bay,
trapped in his sweetheart’s apartment on West End Avenue.
One hundred and fifty policemen and detectives laid siege to his top-floor hideaway. They chopped
holes in the roof; they tried to smoke out Crowley, the “cop killer,” with teargas. Then they mounted their
machine guns on surrounding buildings, and for more than an hour one of New York’s fine residential areas
reverberated with the crack of pistol fire and the rut-tat-tat of machine guns. Crowley, crouching behind an
over-stuffed chair, fired incessantly at the police. Ten thousand excited people watched the battle. Nothing like
it ever been seen before on the sidewalks of New York.
When Crowley was captured, Police Commissioner E. P. Mulrooney declared that the two-gun
desperado was one of the most dangerous criminals ever encountered in the history of New York. “He will kill,”
said the Commissioner, “at the drop of a feather.”
But how did “Two Gun” Crowley regard himself? We know, because while the police were firing into
his apartment, he wrote a letter addressed “To whom it may concern, ” and, as he wrote, the blood flowing from
his wounds left a crimson trail on the paper. In this letter Crowley said, “Under my coat is a weary heart, but a
kind one—one that would do nobody any harm.”
A short time before this, Crowley had been having a necking party with his girlfriend on a country road
out on Long Island. Suddenly a policeman walked up to the car and said, “Let me see your license.”
Without saying a word, Crowley drew his gun and cut the policeman down with a shower of lead. As
the dying officer fell, Crowley leaped out of the car, grabbed the officer’s revolver, and fired another bullet into
the prostrate body. And that was the killer who said, “Under my coat is a weary heart, but a kind one—one that
would do nobody any harm.’
Crowley was sentenced to the electric chair. When he arrived at the death house in Sing Sing, did he
say, “This is what I get for killing people”? No, he said, “This is what I get for defending myself.”
The point of the story is this: “Two Gun” Crowley didn’t blame himself for anything.
Is that an unusual attitude among criminals? If you think so, listen to this:
“I have spent the best years of my life giving people the lighter pleasures, helping them have a good
time, and all I get is abuse, the existence of a hunted man.”
That’s Al Capone speaking. Yes, America’s most notorious Public Enemy—the most sinister gang
leader who ever shot up Chicago. Capone didn’t condemn himself. He actually regarded himself as a public
benefactor—an unappreciated and misunderstood public benefactor.
And so did Dutch Schultz before he crumpled up under gangster bullets in Newark. Dutch Schultz, one
of New York’s most notorious rats, said in a newspaper interview that he was a public benefactor. And he
believed it.
I have had some interesting correspondence with Lewis Lawes, who was warden of New York’s
infamous Sing Sing prison for many years, on this subject, and he declared that “few of the criminals in Sing
Sing regard themselves as bad men. They are just as human as you and I. So they rationalize, they explain. They
can tell you why they had to crack a safe or be quick on the trigger finger. Most of them attempt by a form of
11
reasoning, fallacious or logical, to justify their anti-social acts even to themselves, consequently stoutly
maintaining that they should never have been imprisoned at all.”
If Al Capone, “Two Gun” Crowley, Dutch Schultz, and the desperate men and women behind prison
walls don’t blame themselves for anything—what about the people with whom you and I come in contact?
John Wanamaker, founder of the stores that bear his name, once confessed, “I learned thirty years ago
that it is foolish to scold. I have enough trouble overcoming my own limitations without fretting over the fact
that God has not seen fit to distribute evenly the gift of intelligence.”
Wanamaker learned this lesson early, but I personally had to blunder through this old world for a third
of a century before it even began to dawn upon me that ninety-nine times out of a hundred, people don’t criticize
themselves for anything, no matter how wrong it may be.
Criticism is futile because it puts a person on the defensive and usually makes him strive to justify
himself. Criticism is dangerous, because it wounds a person’s precious pride, hurts his sense of importance, and
arouses resentment.
B. F. Skinner, the world-famous psychologist, proved through his experiments that an animal rewarded
for good behavior will learn much more rapidly and retain what it learns far more effectively than an animal
punished for bad behavior. Later studies have shown that the same applies to humans. By criticizing, we do not
make lasting changes and often incur resentment.
Hans Selye, another great psychologist, said, “As much as we thirst for approval, we dread
condemnation.”
The resentment that criticism engenders can demoralize employees, family members and friends, and
still not correct the situation that has been condemned.
George B. Johnston of Enid, Oklahoma, is the safety coordinator for an engineering company. One of
his responsibilities is to see that employees wear their hard hats whenever they are on the job in the field. He
reported that whenever he came across workers who were not wearing hard hats, he would tell them with a lot of
authority of the regulation and that they must comply. As a result he would get sullen acceptance, and often after
he left, the workers would remove the hats.
He decided to try a different approach. The next time he found some of the workers not wearing their
hard hat, he asked if the hats were uncomfortable or did not fit properly. Then he reminded the men in a pleasant
tone of voice that the hat was designed to protect them from injury and suggested that it always be worn on the
job. The result was increased compliance with the regulation with no resentment or emotional upset.
You will find examples of the futility of criticism bristling on a thousand pages of history, Take, for
example, the famous quarrel between Theodore Roosevelt and President Taft—a quarrel that split the
Republican party, put Woodrow Wilson in the White House, and wrote bold, luminous lines across the First
World War and altered the flow of history. Let’s review the facts quickly. When Theodore Roosevelt stepped
out of the White House in 1908, he supported Taft, who was elected President. Then Theodore Roosevelt went
off to Africa to shoot lions. When he returned, he exploded. He denounced Taft for his conservatism, tried to
secure the nomination for a third term himself, formed the Bull Moose party, and all but demolished the G.O.P.
In the election that followed, William Howard Taft and the Republican party carried only two states—Vermont
and Utah. The most disastrous defeat the party had ever known.
Theodore Roosevelt blamed Taft, but did President Taft blame himself? Of course not. With tears in his
eyes, Taft said: “I don’t see how I could have done any differently from what I have.”
Who was to blame? Roosevelt or Taft? Frankly, I don’t know, and I don’t care. The point I am trying to
make is that all of Theodore Roosevelt’s criticism didn’t persuade Taft that he was wrong. It merely made Taft
strive to justify himself and to reiterate with tears in his eyes: “I don’t see how I could have done any differently
from what I have.”
Or, take the Teapot Dome oil scandal. It kept the newspapers ringing with indignation in the early
1920s. It rocked the nation! Within the memory of living men, nothing like it had ever happened before in
12
American public life. Here are the bare facts of the scandal: Albert B. Fall, secretary of the interior in Harding’s
cabinet, was entrusted with the leasing of government oil reserves at Elk Hill and Teapot Dome—oil reserves
that had been set aside for the future use of the Navy. Did secretary Fall permit competitive bidding? No sir. He
handed the fat, juicy contract outright to his friend Edward L. Doheny. And what did Doheny do? He gave
Secretary Fall what he was pleased to call a “loan” of one hundred thousand dollars. Then, in a high-handed
manner, Secretary Fall ordered United States Marines into the district to drive off competitors whose adjacent
wells were sapping oil out of the Elk Hill reserves. These competitors, driven off their ground at the ends of
guns and bayonets, rushed into court—and blew the lid off the Teapot Dome scandal. A stench arose so vile that
it ruined the Harding Administration, nauseated an entire nation, threatened to wreck the Republican party, and
put Albert B. Fall behind prison bars.
Fall was condemned viciously—condemned as few men in public life have ever been. Did he repent?
Never! Years later Herbert Hoover intimated in a public speech that President Harding’s death had been due to
mental anxiety and worry because a friend had betrayed him. When Mrs. Fall heard that, she sprang from her
chair, she wept, she shook her fists at fate and screamed, “What! Harding betrayed by Fall? No! My husband
never betrayed anyone. This whole house full of gold would not tempt my husband to do wrong. He is the one
who has been betrayed and led to the slaughter and crucified.”
There you are; human nature in action, wrongdoers, blaming everybody but themselves. We are all like
that. So when you and I are tempted to criticize someone tomorrow, let’s remember Al Capone, “Two Gun”
Crowley and Albert Fall. Let’s realize that criticisms are like homing pigeons. They always return home. Let’s
realize that the person we are going to correct and condemn will probably justify himself or herself, and
condemn us in return; or, like the gentle Taft, will say, “I don’t see how I could have done any differently from
what I have.”
On the morning of April 15, 1865, Abraham Lincoln lay dying in a hall bedroom of a cheap lodging
house directly across the street from Ford’s Theater, where John Wilkes Booth had shot him. Lincoln’s long
body lay stretched diagonally across a sagging bed that was too short for him. A cheap reproduction of Rosa
Bonheur’s famous painting The Horse Fair hung above the bed, and a dismal gas jet flickered yellow light.
As Lincoln lay dying, Secretary of War Stanton said, “There lies the most perfect ruler of men that the
world has ever seen.”
What was the secret of Lincoln’s success in dealing with people? I studied the life of Abraham Lincoln
for ten years and devoted all of three years to writing and rewriting a book entitled Lincoln the Unknown. I
believe I have made as detailed and exhaustive a study of Lincoln’s personality and home life as it is possible
for any being to make. I made a special study of Lincoln’s method of dealing with people. Did he indulge in
criticism? Oh, yes. As a young man in the Pigeon Creek Valley of Indiana, he not only criticized but he wrote
letters and poems ridiculing people and dropped these letters on the country roads where they were sure to be
found. One of these letters aroused resentments that burned for a lifetime.
Even after Lincoln had become a practicing lawyer in Springfield, Illinois, he attacked his opponents
openly in letters published in the newspapers. But he did this just once too often.
In the autumn of 1842 he ridiculed a vain, pugnacious politician by the name of James Shields. Lincoln
lambasted him through an anonymous letter published in Springfield Journal. The town roared with laughter.
Shields, sensitive and proud, boiled with indignation. He found out who wrote the letter, leaped on his horse,
started after Lincoln, and challenged him to fight a duel. Lincoln didn’t want to fight. He was opposed to
dueling, but he couldn’t get out of it and save his honor. He was given the choice of weapons. Since he had very
long arms, he chose cavalry broadswords and took lessons in sword fighting from a West Point graduate; and,
on the appointed day, he and Shields met on a sandbar in the Mississippi River, prepared to fight to the death;
but, at the last minute, their seconds interrupted and stopped the duel.
That was the most lurid personal incident in Lincoln’s life. It taught him an invaluable lesson in the art
of dealing with people. Never again did he write an insulting letter. Never again did he ridicule anyone. And
from that time on, he almost never criticized anybody for anything.
Time after time, during the Civil War, Lincoln put a new general at the head of the Army of the
Potomac, and each one in turn—McClellan, Pope, Burnside, Hooker, Meade—blundered tragically and drove
Lincoln to pacing the floor in despair. Half the nation savagely condemned these incompetent generals, but
13
Lincoln, “with malice toward none, with charity for all,” held his peace. One of his favorite quotations was
“Judge not, that ye be not judged.”
And when Mrs. Lincoln and others spoke harshly of the southern people, Lincoln replied, “Don’t
criticize them; they are just what we would be under similar circumstances.”
Yet if any man ever had occasion to criticize, surely it was Lincoln. Let’s take just one illustration:
The Battle of Gettysburg was fought during the first three days of July 1863. During the night of July 4,
Lee began to retreat southward while storm clouds deluged the country with rain. When Lee reached the
Potomac with his defeated army, he found a swollen, impassable river in front of him, and a victorious Union
Army behind him. Lee was in a trap. He couldn’t escape. Lincoln saw that. Here was a golden, heaven-sent
opportunity—the opportunity to capture Lee’s army and end the war immediately. So, with a surge of high
hope, Lincoln ordered Meade not to call a council of war but to attack Lee immediately. Lincoln telegraphed his
orders and then sent a special messenger to Meade demanding immediate action.
And what did General Meade do? He did the very opposite of what he was told to do. He called a
council of war in direct violation of Lincoln’s orders. He hesitated. He procrastinated. He telegraphed all
manner of excuses. He refused point-blank to attack Lee. Finally the waters receded and Lee escaped over the
Potomac with his forces.
Lincoln was furious, “ What does this mean?” Lincoln cried to his son Robert. “Great God! What does
this mean? We had them within our grasp, and had only to stretch forth our hands and they were ours; yet
nothing that I could say or do could make the army move. Under the circumstances, almost any general could
have defeated Lee. If I had gone up there, I could have whipped him myself.”
In bitter disappointment, Lincoln sat down and wrote Meade this letter. And remember, at this period
of his life Lincoln was extremely conservative and restrained in his phraseology. So this letter coming from
Lincoln in 1863 was tantamount to the severest rebuke.
“My dear General,
I do not believe you appreciate the magnitude of the misfortune involved in Lee’s escape. He was
within our easy grasp, and to have closed upon him would, in connection with our other late successes, have
ended the war. As it is, the war will be prolonged indefinitely. If you could not safely attack Lee last Monday,
how can you possibly do so south of the river, when you can take with you very few—no more than two-thirds
of the force you then had in hand? It would be unreasonable to expect and I do not expect that you can now
effect much. Your golden opportunity is gone, and I am distressed immeasurably because of it.”
What do you suppose Meade did when he read the letter?
Meade never saw that letter. Lincoln never mailed it. It was found among his papers after his death.
My guess is—and this is only a guess—that after writing that letter, Lincoln looked out of the window
and said to himself, “Just a minute. Maybe I ought not to be so hasty. It is easy enough for me to sit here in the
quiet of the White House and order Meade to attack; but if I had been up at Gettysburg, and if I had seen as
much blood as Meade has seen during the last week, and if my ears had been pierced with the screams and
shrieks of the wounded and dying, maybe I wouldn’t be so anxious to attack either. If I had Meade’s timid
temperament, perhaps I would have done just what he had done. Anyhow, it is water under the bridge now. If I
send this letter, it will relieve my feelings, but it will make Meade try to justify himself. It will make him
condemn me. It will arouse hard feelings, impair all his further usefulness as a commander, and perhaps force
him to resign from the army.”
So, as I have already said, Lincoln put the letter aside, for he had learned by bitter experience that sharp
criticisms and rebukes almost invariably end in futility.
Theodore Roosevelt said that when he, as President, was confronted with a perplexing problem, he
used to lean back and look up at a large painting of Lincoln which hung above his desk in the White House and
ask himself, “What would Lincoln do if he were in my shoes? How would he solve this problem?”
14
The next time we are tempted to admonish somebody, let’s pull a five-dollar bill out of our pocket,
look at Lincoln’s picture on the bill, and ask. “How would Lincoln handle this problem if he had it?”
Mark Twain lost his temper occasionally and wrote letters that turned the Paper brown. For example,
he once wrote to a man who had aroused his ire: “The thing for you is a burial permit. You have only to speak
and I will see that you get it.” On another occasion he wrote to an editor about a proofreader’s attempts to
“improve my spelling and punctuation.” He ordered, “Set the matter according to my copy hereafter and see that
the proofreader retains his suggestions in the mush of his decayed brain.”
The writing of these stinging letters made Mark Twain feel better. They allowed him to blow off steam,
and the letters didn’t do any real harm, because Mark’s wife secretly lifted them out of the mail. They were
never sent.
Do you know someone you would like to change and regulate and improve? Good! That is fine. I am
all in favor of it, but why not begin on yourself? From a purely selfish standpoint, that is a lot more profitable
than trying to improve others—yes, and a lot less dangerous. “Don’t complain about the snow on your
neighbor’s roof,” said Confucius, “when your own doorstep is unclean.”
When I was still young and trying hard to impress people, I wrote a foolish letter to Richard Harding
Davis, an author who once loomed large on the literary horizon of America. I was preparing a magazine article
about authors, and I asked Davis to tell me about his method of work. A few weeks earlier, I had received a
letter from someone with this notation at the bottom: “Dictated but not read.” I was quite impressed. I felt that
the writer must be very big and busy and important. I wasn’t the slightest bit busy, but I was eager to make an
impression on Richard Harding Davis, so I ended my short note with the words: “Dictated but not read.”
He never troubled to answer the letter. He simply returned it to me with this scribbled across the
bottom: “Your bad manners are exceeded only by your bad manners.” True, I had blundered, and perhaps I
deserved this rebuke. But, being human, I resented it. I resented it so sharply that when I read of the death of
Richard Harding Davis ten years later, the one thought that still persisted in my mind—I am ashamed to admit—
was the hurt he had given me.
If you and I want to stir up a resentment tomorrow that may rankle across the decades and endure until
death, just let us indulge in a little stinging criticism, no matter how certain we are that it is justified.
When dealing with people, let us remember we are not dealing with creatures of logic. We are dealing
with creatures of emotion, creatures bristling with prejudices and motivated by pride and vanity.
Bitter criticism caused the sensitive Thomas Hardy, one of the finest novelists ever to enrich English
literature, to give up forever the writing of fiction. Criticism drove Thomas Chatterton, the English poet, to
suicide.
Benjamin Franklin, tactless in his youth, became so diplomatic, so adroit at handling people, that he
was made American Ambassador to France. The secret of his success? “I will speak ill of no man,” he said, "and
speak all the good I know of everybody.”
Any fool can criticize, condemn and complain, and most fools do.
But it takes character and self-control to be understanding and forgiving.
“A great man shows his greatness,” said Carlyle, “by the way he treats little men.”
Bob Hoover, a famous test pilot and frequent performer at air shows, was returning to his home in Los
Angeles from an air show in San Diego. As described in the magazine Flight Operations, at three hundred feet
in the air, both engines suddenly stopped. By deft maneuvering he managed to land the plane, but it was badly
damaged although nobody was hurt.
Hoover’s first act after the emergency landing was to inspect the airplane’s fuel. Just as he suspected,
the World War II propeller plane he had been flying had been fueled with jet fuel rather than gasoline.
15
Upon returning to the airport, he asked to see the mechanic who had serviced his airplane. The young
man was sick with the agony of his mistake. Tears streamed down his face as Hoover approached. He had just
caused the loss of a very expensive plane and could have caused the loss of three lives as well.
You can imagine Hoover’s anger. One could anticipate the tongue-lashing that this proud and precise
pilot would unleash for that carelessness. But Hoover didn’t scold the mechanic; he didn’t even criticize him.
Instead, he put his big arm around the man’s shoulder and said, “To show you I’m sure that you’ll never do this
again, I want you to service my F-51 tomorrow.”
Often parents are tempted to criticize their children. You would expect me to say “don’t.” But I will
not, I am merely going to say, “Before you criticize them, read one of the classics of American journalism,
‘Father Forgets’.” It originally appeared as an editorial in the People’s Home Journal. We are reprinting it here
with the author’s permission, as condensed in the Reader’s Digest.
“Father Forgets” is one of those little pieces which—dashed of in a moment of sincere feeling—strikes
an echoing chord in so many readers as to become a perennial reprint favorite. Since its first appearance, “Father
Forgets” has been reproduced, writes the author, W. Livingston Larned, “in hundreds of magazines and house
organs, and in newspapers the country over. It has been reprinted almost as extensively in many foreign
languages. I have given personal permission to thousands who wished to read it from school, church, and lecture
platforms. It has been ‘on the air’ on countless occasions and programs. Oddly enough, college periodicals have
used it, and high-school magazines. Sometimes a little piece seems mysteriously to ‘click’. This one certainly
did.”
FATHER FORGETS
W. Livingston Larned
Listen, son: I am saying this as you lie asleep, one little paw crumpled under your cheek and the blond
curls stickily wet on your damp forehead. I have stolen into your room alone. Just a few minutes ago, as I sat
reading my paper in the library, a stifling wave of remorse swept over me. Guiltily I came to your bedside.
There are the things I was thinking, son: I had been cross to you. I scolded you as you were dressing for
school because you gave your face merely a dab with a towel. I took you to task for not cleaning your shoes. I
called out angrily when you threw some of your things on the floor.
At breakfast I found fault, too. You spilled things. You gulped down your food. You put your elbows
on the table. You spread butter too thick on your bread. And as you started off to play and I made for my train,
you turned and waved a hand and called, “Goodbye, Daddy!” and I frowned, and said in reply, “Hold your
shoulders back!”
Then it began all over again in the late afternoon. As I came up the road I spied you, down on your
knees, playing marbles. There were holes in your stockings. I humiliated you before your boyfriends by
marching you ahead of me to the house. Stockings were expensive, and if you had to buy them you would be
more careful! Imagine that, son, from a father!
Do you remember, later, when I was reading in the library, how you came in timidly, with a sort of hurt
look in your eyes? When I glanced up over my paper, impatient at the interruption, you hesitated at the door.
“What is it you want?” I snapped.
You said nothing, but ran across in one tempestuous plunge, and threw your arms around my neck and
kissed me, and your small arms tightened with an affection that God had set blooming in your heart and which
even neglect could not wither. And then you were gone, pattering up the stairs.
Well, son, it was shortly afterwards that my paper slipped from my hands and a terrible sickening fear
came over me. What has habit been doing to me? The habit of finding fault, of reprimanding—this was my
reward to you for being a boy. It was not that I did not love you; it was that I expected too much of youth. I was
measuring you by the yardstick of my own years.
And there was so much that was good and fine and true in your character. The little heart of you was as
big as the dawn itself over the wide hills. This was shown by your spontaneous impulse to rush in and kiss me
16
goodnight. Nothing else matters tonight, son. I have come to your bedside in the darkness, and I have knelt
there, ashamed!
It is a feeble atonement; I know you would not understand these things if I told them to you during
your waking hours. But tomorrow I will be a real daddy! I will chum with you, and suffer when you suffer, and
laugh when you laugh. I will bite my tongue when impatient words come. I will keep saying as if it were a
ritual: “He is nothing but a boy—a little boy!”
I am afraid I have visualized you as a man. Yet as I see you now, son, crumpled and weary in your cot,
I see that you are still a baby. Yesterday you were in your mother’s arms, your head on her shoulder. I have
asked too much, too much.
Instead of condemning people, let’s try to understand them. Let’s try to figure out why they do what
they do. That’s a lot more profitable and intriguing than criticism, and it breeds sympathy, tolerance and
kindness. “To know all is to forgive all.”
As Dr. Johnson said, “God himself, sir, does not propose to judge man until the end of his days.”
Why should you and I?
PRINCIPLE 1
Don’t criticize, condemn or complain.
17
2
“THE BIG SECRET OF DEALING WITH PEOPLE.”
There is only one way under high heaven to get anybody to do anything. Did you ever stop to think of
that? Yes, just one way. And that is by making the other person want to do it.
Remember, there is no other way.
Of course, you can make someone want to give you his watch by sticking a revolver in his ribs. You
can make your employees give you cooperation—until your back is turned—by threatening to fire them. You
can make a child do what you want it to do by a whip or a threat. But these crude methods have sharply
undesirable repercussions.
The only way I can get you to do anything is by giving you what you want.
What do you want?
Sigmund Freud said that everything you and I do springs from two motives: the sex urge and the desire
to be great.
John Dewey, one of America’s most profound philosophers, phrased it a bit differently. Dr. Dewey
said that the deepest urge in human nature is “the desire to be important". Remember that phrase: “the desire to
be important." It is significant. You are going to hear a lot about it in this book.
What do you want? Not many things, but the few that you do wish, you crave with an insistence that
will not be denied. Some of the things most people want include:
1. Health and the preservation of life.
2. Food.
3. Sleep.
4. Money and the things money will buy.
5. Life in the hereafter.
6. Sexual gratification.
7. The well-being of our children.
8. A feeling of importance.
Almost all these wants are usually gratified—all except one. But there is one longing—almost as deep,
almost as imperious, as the desire for food or sleep—which is seldom gratified. It is what Freud calls “the desire
to be great.” It is what Dewey calls the “desire to be important”.
Lincoln once began a letter saying, “Everybody likes a compliment.” William James said, “The
deepest principle in human nature is the craving to be appreciated.” He didn’t speak, mind you, of the “wish” or
the “desire” or the “longing” to be appreciated. He said the “craving” to be appreciated.
Here is a gnawing and unfaltering human hunger, and the rare individual who honestly satisfies this
heart hunger will hold people in the palm of his or her hand and “even the undertaker will be sorry when he
dies.”
The desire for a feeling of importance is one of the chief distinguishing differences between mankind
and the animals. To illustrate: When I was a farm boy out in Missouri, my father bred fine Duroc-Jersey hogs
and pedigreed white-faced cattle. We used to exhibit our hogs and white-faced cattle at the country fairs and
livestock shows throughout the Middle West. We won first prizes by the score. My father pinned his blue
ribbons on a sheet of white muslin, and when friends or visitors came to the house, he would get out the long
sheet of muslin. He would hold one end and I would hold the other while he exhibited the blue ribbons.
18
The hogs didn’t care about the ribbons they had won. But Father did. These prizes gave him a feeling
of importance.
If our ancestors hadn’t had this flaming urge for a feeling of importance, civilization would have been
impossible. Without it, we should have been just about like animals.
It was this desire for a feeling of importance that led an uneducated, poverty-stricken grocery clerk to
study some law books he found in the bottom of a barrel of household plunder that he had bought for fifty cents.
You have probably heard of this grocery clerk. His name was Lincoln.
It was this desire for a feeling of importance that inspired Dickens to write his immortal novels. This
desire inspired Sir Christopher Wren to design his symphonies in stone. This desire made Rockefeller amass
millions that he never spent! And this same desire made the richest family in your town build a house far too
large for its requirements.
This desire makes you want to wear the latest styles, drive the latest cars, and talk about your brilliant
children.
It is this desire that lures many boys and girls into joining gangs and engaging in criminal activities.
The average young criminal, according to E. P. Mulrooney, one-time police commissioner of New York, is
filled with ego, and his first request after arrest is for those lurid newspapers that make him out a hero. The
disagreeable prospect of serving time seems remote so long as he can gloat over his likeness sharing space with
pictures of sports figures, movie and TV stars and politicians.
If you tell me how you get your feeling of importance, I’ll tell you what you are. That determines your
character. That is the most significant thing about you. For example, John D. Rockefeller got his feeling of
importance by giving money to erect a modern hospital in Peking, China, to care for millions of poor people
whom he had never seen and never would see. Dillinger, on the other hand, got his feeling of importance by
being a bandit, a bank robber and killer. When the FBI agents were hunting him, he dashed into a farmhouse up
in Minnesota and said, “I’m Dillinger!” He was proud of the fact that he was Public Enemy Number One. “I’m
not going to hurt you, but I’m Dillinger!” he said.
Yes, the one significant difference between Dillinger and Rockefeller is how they got their feeling of
importance.
History sparkles with amusing examples of famous people struggling for a feeling of importance. Even
George Washington wanted to be called “His Mightiness, the President of the United States”; and Columbus
pleaded for the title “Admiral of the Ocean and Viceroy of India.” Catherine the Great refused to open letters
that were not addressed to “Her Imperial Majesty”; and Mrs. Lincoln, in the White House, turned upon Mrs.
Grant like a tigress and shouted, “How dare you be seated in my presence until I invite you!”
Our millionaires helped finance Admiral Byrd’s expedition to the Antarctic in 1928 with the
understanding that ranges of icy mountains would be named after them; and Victor Hugo aspired to have
nothing less than the city of Paris renamed in his honor. Even Shakespeare, mightiest of the mighty, tried to add
luster to his name by procuring a coat of arms for his family.
People sometimes became invalids in order to win sympathy and attention, and get a feeling of
importance. For example, take Mrs. McKinley. She got a feeling of importance by forcing her husband, the
President of the United States, to neglect important affairs of state while he reclined on the bed beside her for
hours at a time, his arm about her, soothing her to sleep. She fed her gnawing desire for attention by insisting
that he remain with her while she was having her teeth fixed, and once created a stormy scene when he had to
leave her alone with the dentist while he kept an appointment with John Hay, his secretary of state.
The writer Mary Roberts Rinehart once told me of a bright, vigorous young woman who became an
invalid in order to get a feeling of importance. “One day,” said Mrs. Rinehart, “this woman had been obliged to
face something, her age perhaps. The lonely years were stretching ahead and there was little left for her to
anticipate.
“She took to her bed; and for ten years her old mother traveled to the third floor and back, carrying
trays, nursing her. Then one day the old mother, weary with service, lay down and died. For some weeks, the
19
invalid languished; then she got up, put on her clothing, and resumed living again.”
Some authorities declare that people may actually go insane in order to find, in the dreamland of
insanity, the feeling of importance that has been denied them in the harsh world of reality. There are more
patients suffering from mental diseases in the United States than from all other diseases combined.
What is the cause of insanity?
Nobody can answer such a sweeping question, but we know that certain diseases, such as syphilis,
break down and destroy the brain cells and result in insanity. In fact, about one-half of all mental diseases can
be attributed to such physical causes as brain lesions, alcohol, toxins and injuries. But the other half—and this is
the appalling part of the story—the other half of the people who go insane apparently have nothing organically
wrong with their brain cells. In post-mortem examinations, when their brain tissues are studied under the
highest-powered microscopes, these tissues are found to be apparently just as healthy as yours and mine.
Why do these people go insane?
I put that question to the head physician of one of our most important psychiatric hospitals. This
doctor, who has received the highest honors and the most coveted awards for his knowledge of this subject, told
me frankly that he didn’t know why people went insane. Nobody knows for sure But he did say that many
people who go insane find in insanity a feeling of importance that they were unable to achieve in the world of
reality. Then he told me this story:
"I have a patient right now whose marriage proved to be a tragedy. She wanted love, sexual
gratification, children and social prestige, but life blasted all her hopes. Her husband didn’t love her. He refused
even to eat with her and forced her to serve his meals in his room upstairs. She had no children, no social
standing. She went insane; and, in her imagination, she divorced her husband and resumed her maiden name.
She now believes she has married into English aristocracy, and she insists on being called Lady Smith.
“And as for children, she imagines now that she has had a new child every night. Each time I call on
her she says, ‘Doctor, I had a baby last night.’”
Life once wrecked all her dream ships on the sharp rocks of reality; but in the sunny, fantasy isles of
insanity, all her barkentines race into port with canvas billowing and winds singing through the masts.
“Tragic? Oh, I don’t know. Her physician said to me, ‘If I could stretch out my hand and restore her
sanity, I wouldn’t do it. She’s much happier as she is.’”
If some people are so hungry for a feeling of importance that they actually go insane to get it, imagine
what miracle you and I can achieve by giving people honest appreciation this side of insanity.
One of the first people in American business to be paid a salary of over a million dollars a year (when
there was no income tax and a person earning fifty dollars a week was considered well-off) was Charles
Schwab, who had been picked by Andrew Carnegie to become the first president of the newly formed United
States Steel Company in 1921, when he was only thirty-eight years old (Schwab later left U.S. Steel to take over
the then-troubled Bethlehem Steel Company, and he rebuilt it into one of the most profitable companies in
America).
Why did Andrew Carnegie pay a million dollars a year, or more than three thousand dollars a day, to
Charles Schwab? Why? Because Schwab was a genius? No. Because he knew more about the manufacture of
steel than other people? Nonsense. Charles Schwab told me himself that he had many men working for him who
knew more about the manufacture of steel than he did.
Schwab says that he was paid this salary largely because of his ability to deal with people. I asked him
how he did it. Here is his secret set down in his own words—words that ought to be cast in eternal bronze and
hung in every home and school, every shop and office in the land—words that children ought to memorize
instead of wasting their time memorizing the conjugation of Latin verbs or the amount of the annual rainfall in
Brazil—words that will all but transform your life and mine if we will only live them:
“I consider my ability to arouse enthusiasm among my people,” said Schwab, “the greatest asset I
20
possess, and the way to develop the best that is in a person is by appreciation and encouragement.
“There is nothing else that so kills the ambitions of a person as criticisms from superiors. I never
criticize anyone. I believe in giving a person incentive to work. So I am anxious to praise but loath to find fault.
If I like anything, I am hearty in my approbation and lavish in my praise.”
That is what Schwab did. But what do average people do? The exact opposite. If they don’t like a
thing, they bawl out their subordinates; if they do like it, they say nothing. As the old couplet says: “Once I did
bad and that I heard ever/Twice I did good, but that I heard never.”
“In my wide association in life, meeting with many and great people in various parts of the world,”
Schwab declared, “I have yet to find the person, however great or exalted his station, who did not do better
work and put forth greater effort under a spirit of approval than he would ever do under a spirit of criticism.”
That he said, frankly, was one of the outstanding reasons for the phenomenal success of Andrew
Carnegie. Carnegie praised his associates publicly as well as privately.
Carnegie wanted to praise his assistants even on his tombstone. He wrote an epitaph for himself which
read: “Here lies one who knew how to get around him men who were cleverer than himself.”
Sincere appreciation was one of the secrets of the first John D. Rockefeller’s success in handling men.
For example, when one of his partners, Edward T. Bedford, lost a million dollars for the firm by a bad buy in
South America, John D. might have criticized; but he knew Bedford had done his best, and the incident was
closed. So Rockefeller found something to praise; he congratulated Bedford because he had been able to save
60 percent of the money he had invested. “That’s splendid,” said Rockefeller. “We don’t always do as well as
that upstairs.”
I have among my clippings a story that I know never happened, but it illustrates a truth, so I’ll repeat it:
According to this silly story, a farmwoman, at the end of a heavy day’s work, set before her menfolks a
heaping pile of hay. And when they indignantly demanded whether she had gone crazy, she replied: “Why, how
did I know you’d notice? I’ve been cooking for you men for the last twenty years and in all that time I ain’t
heard no word to let me know you wasn’t just eating hay.”
When a study was made a few years ago on runaway wives, what do you think was discovered to be
the main reason wives ran away? It was “lack of appreciation”. And I’d bet that a similar study made of
runaway husbands would come out the same way. We often take our spouses so much for granted that we never
let them know we appreciate them.
A member of one of our classes told of a request made by his wife. She and a group of other women in
her church were involved in a self-improvement program. She asked her husband to help her by listing six
things he believed she could do to help herself become a better wife. He reported to the class, “I was surprised
by such a request. Frankly, it would have been easy for me to list six things I would like to change about her—
my heavens, she could have listed a thousand things she would like to change about me—but I didn’t. I said to
her, ‘Let me think about it and give you an answer in the morning.’
“The next morning I got up very early and called the florist and had them send six red roses to my wife
with a note saying: ‘I can’t think of six things I would like to change about you. I love you the way you are.’
“When I arrived at home that evening, who do you think greeted me at the door: That’s right. My wife!
She was almost in tears. Needless to say, I was extremely glad I had not criticized her as she had requested.
“The following Sunday at church, after she had reported the results of her assignment, several women
with whom she had been studying came up to me and said, ‘That was the most considerate thing I have ever
heard.’ It was then I realized the power of appreciation.”
Florenz Ziegfeld, the most spectacular producer who ever dazzled Broadway, gained his reputation by
his subtle ability to “glorify the American girl”. Time after time, he took drab little creatures that no one ever
looked at twice and transformed them on the stage into glamorous visions of mystery and seduction. Knowing
the value of appreciation and confidence, he made women feel beautiful by the sheer power of his gallantry and
21
consideration. He was practical: he raised the salary of chorus girls from thirty dollars a week to as high as one
hundred and seventy-five. And he was also chivalrous; on opening night at the Follies, he sent telegrams to the
stars in the cast, and he deluged every chorus girl in the show with American Beauty roses.
I once succumbed to the fad of fasting and went for six days and nights without eating. It wasn’t
difficult. I was less hungry at the end of the sixth day than I was at the end of the second. Yet I know, as you
know, people who would think they had committed a crime if they let their families or employees go for six
days without food; but they will let them go for six days, and six weeks, and sometimes sixty years without
giving them the hearty appreciation that they crave almost as much as they crave food.
When Alfred Lunt, one of the great actors of his time, played the leading role in Reunion in Vienna, he
said, “There is nothing I need so much as nourishment for my self-esteem.”
We nourish the bodies of our children and friends and employees, but how seldom do we nourish their
self-esteem? We provide them with roast beef and potatoes to build energy, but we neglect to give them kind
words of appreciation that would sing in their memories for years like the music of the morning stars.
Paul Harvey, in one of his radio broadcasts, “The Rest of the Story,” told how showing sincere
appreciation could change a person’s life. He reported that years ago a teacher in Detroit asked Stevie Morris to
help her find a mouse that was lost in the classroom. You see, she appreciated the fact that nature had given
Stevie something no one else in the room had. Nature had given Stevie a remarkable pair of ears to compensate
for his blind eyes. But this was really the first time Stevie had been shown appreciation for those talented ears.
Now, years later, he says that this act of appreciation was the beginning of a new life. You see, from that time
on he developed his gift of hearing and went on to become, under the stage name of Stevie Wonder, one of the
great pop singers and songwriters of the seventies. *
* Paul Aurandt, Paul Harvey’s The Rest of the Story (New York: Doubleday, 1977). Edited and compiled by
Lynne Harvey. Copyright © by Paulynne, Inc.
Some readers are saying right now as they read these lines, “Oh, phooey! Flattery! Bear oil! I’ve tried
that stuff. It doesn’t work—not with intelligent people.”
Of course flattery seldom works with discerning people. It is shallow, selfish and insincere. It ought to
fail and it usually does. True, some people are so hungry, so thirsty, for appreciation that they will swallow
anything, just as a starving man will eat grass and fishworms.
Even Queen Victoria was susceptible to flattery. Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli confessed that he
put it on thick in dealing with the Queen. To use his exact words, he said he “spread it on with a trowel.” But
Disraeli was one of the most polished, deft and adroit men who ever ruled the far-flung British Empire. He was
a genius in his line. What would work for him wouldn’t necessarily work for you and me. In the long run,
flattery will do you more harm than good. Flattery is counterfeit, and like counterfeit money, it will eventually
get you into trouble if you pass it to someone else.
The difference between appreciation and flattery? That is simple. One is sincere and the other
insincere. One comes from the heart out; the other from the teeth out. One is unselfish; the other selfish. One is
universally admired; the other universally condemned.
I recently saw a bust of Mexican hero General Alvaro Obregon in the Chapultepec palace in Mexico
City. Below the bust are carved these wise words from General Obregon’s philosophy: “Don’t be afraid of
enemies who attack you. Be afraid of the friends who flatter you.”
No! No! No! I am not suggesting flattery! Far from it. I’m talking about a new way of life. Let me
repeat. I am talking about a new way of life.
King George V had a set of six maxims displayed on the walls of his study at Buckingham Palace. One
of these maxims said: “Teach me neither to proffer nor receive cheap praise.” That’s all flattery is—cheap
praise. I once read a definition of flattery that may be worth repeating: “Flattery is telling the other person
precisely what he thinks about himself.”
“Use what language you will,” said Ralph Waldo Emerson, “you can never say anything but what you
22
are."
If all we had to do was flatter, everybody would catch on and we should all be experts in human
relations.
When we are not engaged in thinking about some definite problem, we usually spend about 95 percent
of our time thinking about ourselves. Now, if we stop thinking about ourselves for a while and begin to think of
the other person’s good points, we won’t have to resort to flattery so cheap and false that it can be spotted
almost before it is out of the mouth.
One of the most neglected virtues of our daily existence is appreciation, Somehow, we neglect to
praise our son or daughter when he or she brings home a good report card, and we fail to encourage our children
when they first succeed in baking a cake or building a birdhouse.
Nothing pleases children more than this kind of parental interest and approval.
The next time you enjoy filet mignon at the club, send word to the chef that it was excellently
prepared, and when a tired salesperson shows you unusual courtesy, please mention it.
Every minister, lecturer and public speaker knows the discouragement of pouring himself or herself
out to an audience and not receiving a single ripple of appreciative comment. What applies to professionals
applies doubly to workers in offices, shops and factories and our families and friends. In our interpersonal
relations we should never forget that all our associates are human beings and hunger for appreciation. It is the
legal tender that all souls enjoy.
Try leaving a friendly trail of little sparks of gratitude on your daily trips. You will be surprised how
they will set small flames of friendship that will be rose beacons on your next visit.
Pamela Dunham of New Fairfield, Connecticut, had among her responsibilities on her job the
supervision of a janitor who was doing a very poor job. The other employees would jeer at him and litter the
hallways to show him what a bad job he was doing. It was so bad, productive time was being lost in the shop.
Without success, Pam tried various ways to motivate this person. She noticed that occasionally he did a
particularly good piece of work. She made a point to praise him for it in front of the other people. Each day the
job he did all around got better, and pretty soon he started doing all his work efficiently. Now he does an
excellent job and other people give him appreciation and recognition. Honest appreciation got results where
criticism and ridicule failed.
Hurting people not only does not change them, it is never called for. There is an old saying that I have
cut out and pasted on my mirror where I cannot help but see it every day:
I shall pass this way but once; any good, therefore, that I can do or any kindness that I can show to any
human being, let me do it now. Let me not defer nor neglect it, for I shall not pass this way again.
Emerson said: “Every man I meet is my superior in some way, In that, I learn of him.”
If that was true of Emerson, isn’t it likely to be a thousand times more true of you and me? Let’s cease
thinking of our accomplishments, our wants. Let’s try to figure out the other person’s good points. Then forget
flattery. Give honest, sincere appreciation. Be “hearty in your approbation and lavish in your praise,” and
people will cherish your words and treasure them and repeat them over a lifetime—repeat them years after you
have forgotten them.
PRINCIPLE 2
Give honest and sincere appreciation.
23
3
“HE WHO CAN DO THIS HAS THE WHOLE WORLD WITH
HIM. HE WHO CANNOT WALKS A LONELY WAY.”
I often went fishing up in Maine during the summer. Personally I am very fond of strawberries and
cream, but I have found that for some strange reason, fish prefer worms. So when I went fishing, I didn’t think
about what I wanted. I thought about what they wanted. I didn’t bait the hook with strawberries and cream.
Rather, I dangled a worm or a grasshopper in front of the fish and said, “Wouldn’t you like to have that?”
Why not use the same common sense when fishing for people?
That is what Lloyd George, Great Britain’s Prime Minister during World War I, did. When someone
asked him how he managed to stay in power after the other wartime leaders—Wilson, Orlando and
Clemenceau—had been forgotten, he replied that if his staying on top might be attributed to any one thing, it
would be to his having learned that it was necessary to bait the hook to suit the fish.
Why talk about what we want? That is childish. Absurd. Of course, you are interested in what you
want. You are eternally interested in it. But no one else is. The rest of us are just like you: we are interested in
what we want.
So the only way on earth to influence other people is to talk about what they want and show them how
to get it.
Remember that tomorrow when you are trying to get somebody to do something. If, for example, you
don’t want your children to smoke, don’t preach at them, and don’t talk about what you want; but show them
that cigarettes may keep them from making the basketball team or winning the hundred-yard dash.
This is a good thing to remember regardless of whether you are dealing with children or calves or
chimpanzees. For example: one day Ralph Waldo Emerson and his son tried to get a calf into the barn. But they
made the common mistake of thinking only of what they wanted: Emerson pushed and his son pulled. But the
calf was doing just what they were doing; he was thinking only of what he wanted, so he stiffened his legs and
stubbornly refused to leave the pasture. The Irish housemaid saw their predicament. She couldn’t write essays
and books; but, on this occasion at least, she had more horse sense, or calf sense, than Emerson had. She thought
of what the calf wanted, so she put her maternal finger in the calf’s mouth and let the calf suck her finger as she
gently led him into the barn.
Every act you have ever performed since the day you were born was performed because you wanted
something. How about the time you gave a large contribution to the Red Cross? Yes, that is no exception to the
rule. You gave the Red Cross the donation because you wanted to lend a helping hand; you wanted to do a
beautiful, unselfish, divine act. “Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have
done it unto me.”
If you hadn’t wanted that feeling more than you wanted your money, you would not have made the
contribution. Of course, you might have made the contribution because you were ashamed to refuse or because a
customer asked you to do it. But one thing is certain. You made the contribution because you wanted something.
Harry A. Overstreet in his illuminating book Influencing Human Behavior said, “Action springs out of
what we fundamentally desire, and the best piece of advice which can be given to would-be persuaders, whether
in business, in the home, in the school, in politics, is: First, arouse in the other person an eager want. He who
can do this has the whole world with him. He who cannot walks a lonely way.”
Andrew Carnegie, the poverty-stricken Scotch lad who started to work at two cents an hour and finally
gave away $365 million, learned early in life that the only way to influence people is to talk in terms of what the
other person wants. He attended school only four years; yet he learned how to handle people.
24
To illustrate: His sister-in-law was worried sick over her two boys. They were at Yale, and they were
so busy with their own affairs that they neglected to write home and paid no attention whatever to their mother’s
frantic letters.
Then Carnegie offered to wager a hundred dollars that he could get an answer by return mail, without
even asking for it. Someone called his bet, so he wrote his nephews a chatty letter, mentioning casually in a
post-script that he was sending each one a five-dollar bill.
He neglected, however, to enclose the money.
Back came replies by return mail thanking “Dear Uncle Andrew” for his kind note and…you can finish
the sentence yourself.
Another example of persuading comes from Stan Novak of Cleveland, Ohio, a participant in our
course. Stan came home from work one evening to find his youngest son, Tim, kicking and screaming on the
living room floor. He was to start kindergarten the next day and was protesting that he would not go. Stan’s
normal reaction would have been to banish the child to his room and tell him he’d just better make up his mind
to go. He had no choice. But tonight, recognizing that this would not really help Tim start kindergarten in the
best frame of mind, Stan sat down and thought, “If I were Tim, why would I be excited about going to
kindergarten?” He and his wife made a list of all the fun things Tim would do such as finger painting, singing
songs, making new friends. Then they put them into action. “We all started finger-painting on the kitchen
table—my wife, Lil, my other son Bob, and myself, all having fun. Soon Tim was peeping around the corner.
Next he was begging to participate. ‘Oh, no! You have to go to kindergarten first to learn how to finger-paint.’
With all the enthusiasm I could muster I went through the list talking in terms he could understand, telling him
all the fun he would have in kindergarten. The next morning, I thought I was the first one up. I went downstairs
and found Tim sitting sound asleep in the living room chair. ‘What are you doing here?’ I asked. ‘I’m waiting to
go to kindergarten. I don’t want to be late.’ The enthusiasm of our entire family had aroused in Tim an eager
want that no amount of discussion or threat could have possibly accomplished.”
Tomorrow you may want to persuade somebody to do something. Before you speak, pause and ask
yourself: “How can I make this person want to do it?”
That question will stop us from rushing into a situation heedlessly, with futile chatter about our desires.
At one time I rented the grand ballroom of a certain New York hotel for twenty nights in each season in
order to hold a series of lectures.
At the beginning of one season, I was suddenly informed that I should have to pay almost three times
as much rent as formerly. This news reached me after the tickets had been printed and distributed and all
announcements had been made.
Naturally, I didn’t want to pay the increase, but what was the use of talking to the hotel about what I
wanted? They were interested only in what they wanted. So a couple of days later I went to see the manager.
“I was a bit shocked when I got your letter,” I said, “but I don’t blame you at all. If I had been in your
position, I should probably have written a similar letter myself. Your duty as the manager of the hotel is to make
all the profit possible. If you don’t do that, you will be fired and you ought to be fired. Now, let’s take a piece of
paper and write down the advantages and the disadvantages that will accrue to you, if you insist on this increase
in rent.”
Then I took a letterhead and ran a line through the center and headed one column ‘Advantages’ and the
other column ‘Disadvantages’.
I wrote down under the head ‘Advantages’ these words: “Ballroom free”. Then I went on to say, “You
will have the advantage of having the ballroom free to rent for dances and conventions. That is a big advantage,
for affairs like that will pay you much more than you can get for a series of lectures. If I tie your ballroom up for
twenty nights during the course of the season, it is sure to mean a loss of some very profitable business to you.
25
“Now, let’s consider the disadvantages. First, instead of increasing your income from me, you are
going to decrease it. In fact, you are going to wipe it out because I cannot pay the rent you are asking. I shall be
forced to hold these lectures at some other place.
“There’s another disadvantage to you also. These lectures attract crowds of educated and cultured
people to your hotel. That is good advertising for you, isn’t it? In fact, if you spent five thousand dollars
advertising in the newspapers, you couldn’t bring as many people to look at your hotel as I can bring by these
lectures. That is worth a lot to a hotel, isn’t it?”
As I talked, I wrote these two ‘disadvantages’ under the proper heading, and handed the sheet of paper
to the manager, saying, “I wish you would carefully consider both the advantages and disadvantages that are
going to accrue to you and then give me your final decision.”
I received a letter the next day, informing me that my rent would be increased only 50 percent instead
of 300 percent.
Mind you, I got this reduction without saying a word about what I wanted. I talked all the time about
what the other person wanted and how he could get it.
Suppose I had done the human, natural thing; suppose I had stormed into his office and said, “What do
you mean by raising my rent three hundred percent when you know the tickets have been printed and the
announcements made? Three hundred percent! Ridiculous! Absurd! I won’t pay it!”
What would have happened then? An argument would have begun to steam and boil and sputter, and
you know how arguments end. Even if I had convinced him that he was wrong, his pride would have made it
difficult for him to back down and give in.
Here is one of the best bits of advice ever given about the fine art of human relationships. “If there is
any one secret of success,” said Henry Ford, “it lies in the ability to get the other person’s point of view and see
things from that person’s angle as well as from your own.”
That is so good, I want to repeat it: "If there is any one secret of success, it lies in the ability to get the
other person’s point of view and see things from that person’s angle as well as from your own.”
That is so simple, so obvious, that anyone ought to see the truth of it at a glance; yet 90 percent of the
people on this earth ignore it 90 percent of the time.
An example? Look at the letters that come across your desk tomorrow morning, and you will find that
most of them violate this important canon of common sense. Take this one, a letter written by the head of the
radio department of an advertising agency with offices scattered across the continent. This letter was sent to the
managers of local radio stations throughout the country (I have set down, in brackets, my reactions to each
paragraph).
Mr. John Blank,
Blankville,
Indiana
Dear Mr. Blank,
The ------ company desires to retain its position in advertising agency leadership in the radio field.
[Who cares what your company desires? I am worried about my own problems. The bank is foreclosing the
mortgage on my house, the bugs are destroying the hollyhocks, the stock market tumbled yesterday. I missed the
eight-fifteen this morning, I wasn’t invited to the Jones’s dance last night, the doctor tells me I have high blood
pressure and neuritis and dandruff. And then what happens? I come down to the office this morning worried,
open my mail and here is some little whippersnapper off in New York yapping about what his company wants.
Bah! If he only realized what sort of impression his letter makes, he would get out of the advertising business
and start manufacturing sheep dip.]
26
This agency’s national advertising accounts were the bulwark of the network. Our subsequent
clearances of station time have kept us at the top of agencies year after year.
[You are big and rich and right at the top, are you? So what? I don’t give two whoops in Hades if you are as big
as General Motors and General Electric and the General Staff of the U.S. Army all combined. If you had as
much sense as a half-witted hummingbird, you would realize that I am interested in how big I am, not how big
you are. All this talk about your enormous success makes me feel small and unimportant.]
We desire to service our accounts with the last word on radio station information.
[You desire! You desire. You unmitigated ass. I’m not interested in what you desire or what the President of the
United States desires. Let me tell you once and for all that I am interested in what I desire, and you haven’t said
a word about that yet in this absurd letter of yours.]
Will you, therefore, put the ---------- company on your preferred list for weekly station information
every single detail that will be useful to an agency in intelligently booking time.
[Preferred list! You have your nerve! You make me feel insignificant by your big talk about your company and
then you ask me to put you on a ‘preferred’ list, and you don’t even say ‘please’ when you ask it.]
A prompt acknowledgment of this letter, giving us your latest ‘doings’, will be mutually helpful.
[You fool! You mail me a cheap form letter—a letter scattered far and wide like the autumn leaves—and you
have the gall to ask me, when I am worried about the mortgage and the hollyhocks and my blood pressure, to sit
down and dictate a personal note acknowledging your form letter, and you ask me to do it ‘promptly’. What do
you mean, ‘promptly’? Don’t you know I am just as busy as you are—or, at least, I like to think I am. And while
we are on the subject, who gave you the lordly right to order me around? You say it will be ‘mutually helpful’.
At last, at last, you have begun to see my viewpoint. But you are vague about how it will be to my advantage.]
Very truly yours,
John Doe
Manager Radio Department
P.S. The enclosed reprint from the Blankville Journal will be of interest to you, and you may want to broadcast
it over your station.
[Finally, down here in the postscript, you mention something that may help me solve one of my problems. Why
didn’t you begin your letter with, but what’s the use? Any advertising man who is guilty of perpetrating such
drivel as you have sent me has something wrong with his medulla oblongata. You don’t need a letter giving our
latest doings. What you need is a quart of iodine in your thyroid gland.]
Now, if people who devote their lives to advertising and who pose as experts in the art of influencing
people to buy, if they write a letter like that, what can we expect from the butcher and baker or the auto
mechanic?
Here is another letter, written by the superintendent of a large freight terminal to a student of this
course, Edward Vermylen. What effect did this letter have on the man to whom it was addressed? Read it and
then I’ll tell you.
A. Zerega’s Sons, Inc.
28 Front St.
Brooklyn, N.Y. 11201
Attention: Mr. Edward Vermylen
Gentlemen,
The operations at our outbound-rail-receiving station are handicapped because a material percentage of
the total business is delivered us in the late afternoon. This condition results in congestion, overtime on the part
of our forces, delays to trucks, and in some cases delays to freight. On November 10, we received from your
company a lot of 510 pieces, which reached here at 4:20 P.M.
27
We solicit your cooperation toward overcoming the undesirable effects arising from late receipt of
freight. May we ask that, on days on which you ship the volume which was received on the above date, effort be
made either to get the truck here earlier or to deliver us part of the freight during the morning?
The advantage that would accrue to you under such an arrangement would be that of more expeditious
discharge of your trucks and the assurance that your business would go forward on the date of its receipt.
Very truly yours,
J----- B ----- Supt.
After reading this letter, Mr. Vermylen, sales manager for A. Zerega’s Sons, Inc., sent it to me with the
following comment:
This letter had the reverse effect from that which was intended. The letter begins by describing the
Terminal’s difficulties, in which we are not interested, generally speaking. Our cooperation is then requested
without any thought as to whether it would inconvenience us, and then, finally, in the last paragraph, the fact is
mentioned that if we do cooperate it will mean more expeditious discharge of our trucks with the assurance that
our freight will go forward on the date of its receipt.
In other words, that in which we are most interested is mentioned last and the whole effect is one of
raising a spirit of antagonism rather than of cooperation.
Let’s see if we can’t rewrite and improve this letter. Let’s not waste any time talking about our
problems. As Henry Ford admonishes, let’s “get the other person’s point of view and see things from his or her
angle, as well as from our own.”
Here is one way of revising the letter. It may not be the best way, but isn’t it an improvement?
Mr. Edward Vermylen
A. Zerega’s Sons, Inc.
28 Front St.
Brooklyn, N.Y. 11201
Dear Mr. Vermylen,
Your company has been one of our good customers for fourteen years. Naturally, we are very grateful
for your patronage and are eager to give you the speedy, efficient service you deserve. However, we regret to
say that it isn’t possible for us to do that when your trucks bring us a large shipment late in the afternoon, as
they did on November 10. Why? Because many other customers make late afternoon deliveries also. Naturally,
that causes congestion. That means your trucks are held up unavoidably at the pier and sometimes even your
freight is delayed.
That’s bad, but it can be avoided. If you make your deliveries at the pier in the morning when possible,
your trucks will be able to keep moving, your freight will get immediate attention, and our workers will get
home early at night to enjoy a dinner of the delicious macaroni and noodles that you manufacture.
Regardless of when your shipments arrive, we shall always cheerfully do all in our power to serve you
promptly. You are busy. Please don’t trouble to answer this note.
Yours truly,
J----- B-----, supt.
Barbara Anderson, who worked in a bank in New York, desired to move to Phoenix, Arizona, because
of the health of her son. Using the principles she had learned in our course, she wrote the following letter to
twelve banks in Phoenix:
Dear Sir,
My ten years of bank experience should be of interest to a rapidly growing bank like yours.
28
In various capacities in bank operations with the Bankers Trust Company in New York, leading to my
present assignment as Branch Manager, I have acquired skills in all phases of banking including depositor
relations, credits, loans and administration.
I will be relocating to Phoenix in May and I am sure I can contribute to your growth and profit. I will
be in Phoenix the week of April 3 and would appreciate the opportunity to show you how I can help your bank
meet its goals.
Sincerely,
Barbara L. Anderson
Do you think Mrs. Anderson received any response from that letter? Eleven of the twelve banks invited
her to be interviewed, and she had a choice of which bank’s offer to accept. Why? Mrs. Anderson did not state
what she wanted, but wrote in the letter how she could help them, and focused on their wants, not her own.
Thousands of salespeople are pounding the pavements today, tired, discouraged and underpaid. Why?
Because they are always thinking only of what they want. They don’t realize that neither you nor I want to buy
anything. If we did, we would go out and buy it. But both of us are eternally interested in solving our problems.
And if salespeople can show us how their services or merchandise will help us solve our problems, they won’t
need to sell us. We’ll buy. And customers like to feel that they are buying, not being sold.
Yet many salespeople spend a lifetime in selling without seeing things from the customer’s angle. For
example, for many years I lived in Forest Hills, a little community of private homes in the center of Greater
New York. One day as I was rushing to the station, I chanced to meet a real-estate operator who had bought and
sold property in that area for many years. He knew Forest Hills well, so I hurriedly asked him whether or not my
stucco house was built with metal lath or hollow tile. He said he didn’t know and told me what I already knew,
that I could find out by calling the Forest Hills Garden Association. The following morning, I received a letter
from him. Did he give me the information I wanted? He could have gotten it in sixty seconds by a telephone
call. But he didn’t. He told me again that I could get it by telephoning, and then asked me to let him handle my
insurance.
He was not interested in helping me. He was interested only in helping himself.
J. Howard Lucas of Birmingham, Alabama, tells how two salespeople from the same company handled
the same type of situation, He reported:
“Several years ago I was on the management team of a small company. Headquartered near us was the
district office of a large insurance company. Their agents were assigned territories, and our company was
assigned to two agents, whom I shall refer to as Carl and John.
“One morning, Carl dropped by our office and casually mentioned that his company had just
introduced a new life insurance policy for executives and thought we might be interested later on and he would
get back to us when he had more information on it.
“The same day, John saw us on the sidewalk while returning from a coffee break, and he shouted, ‘Hey
Luke, hold up, I have some great news for you fellows.’ He hurried over and very excitedly told us about an
executive life insurance policy his company had introduced that very day (it was the same policy that Carl had
casually mentioned). He wanted us to have one of the first issued. He gave us a few important facts about the
coverage and ended saying, ‘The policy is so new, I’m going to have someone from the home office come out
tomorrow and explain it. Now, in the meantime, let’s get the applications signed and on the way so he can have
more information to work with.’ His enthusiasm aroused in us an eager want for this policy even though we still
did not have details. When they were made available to us, they confirmed John’s initial understanding of the
policy, and he not only sold each of us a policy, but later doubled our coverage.
“Carl could have had those sales, but he made no effort to arouse in us any desire for the policies.”
The world is full of people who are grabbing and self-seeking. So the rare individual who unselfishly
tries to serve others has an enormous advantage. He has little competition. Owen D. Young, a noted lawyer and
one of America’s great business leaders, once said, “People who can put themselves in the place of other people
who can understand the workings of their minds, need never worry about what the future has in store for them.”
29
If out of reading this book you get just one thing—an increased tendency to think always in terms of
other people’s point of view, and see things from their angle—if you get that one thing out of this book, it may
easily prove to be one of the building blocks of your career.
Looking at the other person’s point of view and arousing in him an eager want for something is not to
be construed as manipulating that person so that he will do something that is only for your benefit and his
detriment. Each party should gain from the negotiation. In the letters to Mr. Vermylen, both the sender and the
receiver of the correspondence gained by implementing what was suggested. Both the bank and Mrs. Anderson
won by her letter in that the bank obtained a valuable employee and Mrs. Anderson a suitable job. And in the
example of John’s sale of insurance to Mr. Lucas, both gained through this transaction.
Another example in which everybody gains through this principle of arousing an eager want comes
from Michael E. Whidden of Warwick, Rhode Island, who is a territory salesman for the Shell Oil Company.
Mike wanted to become the Number One salesperson in his district, but one service station was holding him
back. It was run by an older man who could not be motivated to clean up his station. It was in such poor shape
that sales were declining significantly.
This manager would not listen to any of Mike’s pleas to upgrade the station. After many exhortations
and heart-to-heart talks—all of which had no impact—Mike decided to invite the manager to visit the newest
Shell station in his territory.
The manager was so impressed by the facilities at the new station that when Mike visited him the next
time, his station was cleaned up and had recorded a sales increase. This enabled Mike to reach the Number One
spot in his district. All his talking and discussion hadn’t helped, but by arousing an eager want in the manager,
by showing him the modern station, he had accomplished his goal, and both the manager and Mike benefited.
Most people go through college and learn to read Virgil and master the mysteries of calculus without
ever discovering how their own minds function. For instance: I once gave a course in Effective Speaking for the
young college graduates who were entering the employ of the Carrier Corporation, the large air-conditioner
manufacturer. One of the participants wanted to persuade the others to play basketball in their free time, and this
is about what he said, “I want you to come out and play basketball. I like to play basketball, but the last few
times I’ve been to the gymnasium there haven’t been enough people to get up a game. Two or three of us got to
throwing the ball around the other night—and I got a black eye. I wish all of you would come down tomorrow
night. I want to play basketball.”
Did he talk about anything you want? You don’t want to go to a gymnasium that no one else goes to,
do you? You don’t care about what he wants. You don’t want to get a black eye.
Could he have shown you how to get the things you want by using the gymnasium? Surely. More pep.
Keener edge to the appetite. Clearer brain. Fun. Games. Basketball.
To repeat Professor Overstreet’s wise advice: First, arouse in the other person an eager want. He who
can do this has the whole world with him. He who cannot walks a lonely way.
One of the students in the author’s training course was worried about his little boy. The child was
underweight and refused to eat properly. His parents used the usual method. They scolded and nagged. “Mother
wants you to eat this and that.” “Father wants you to grow up to be a big man.”
Did the boy pay any attention to these pleas? Just about as much as you pay to one fleck of sand on a
sandy beach.
No one with a trace of horse sense would expect a child three years old to react to the viewpoint of a
father thirty years old. Yet that was precisely what that father had expected. It was absurd. He finally saw that.
So he said to himself, “What does that boy want? How can I tie up what I want to what he wants?”
It was easy for the father when he starting thinking about it. His boy had a tricycle that he loved to ride
up and down the sidewalk in front of the house in Brooklyn. A few doors down the street lived a bully—a
bigger boy who would pull the little boy off his tricycle and ride it himself.
30
Naturally, the little boy would run screaming to his mother, and she would have to come out and take
the bully off the tricycle and put her little boy on again. This happened almost every day.
What did the little boy want? It didn’t take a Sherlock Holmes to answer that one. His pride, his anger,
his desire for a feeling of importance—all the strongest emotions in his makeup—goaded him to get revenge, to
smash the bully in the nose. And when his father explained that the boy would be able to wallop the daylights
out of the bigger kid someday if he would only eat the things his mother wanted him to eat—when his father
promised him that—there was no longer any problem of dietetics. That boy would have eaten spinach,
sauerkraut, salt mackerel—anything in order to be big enough to whip the bully who had humiliated him so
often.
After solving that problem, the parents tackled another: the little boy had the unholy habit of wetting
his bed.
He slept with his grandmother. In the morning, his grandmother would wake up and feel the sheet and
say, “Look, Johnny, what you did again last night.”
He would say, “No, I didn’t do it. You did it.”
Scolding, spanking, shaming him, reiterating that the parents didn’t want him to do it—none of these
things kept the bed dry. So the parents asked, “How can we make this boy want to stop wetting his bed?”
What were his wants? First, he wanted to wear pajamas like Daddy instead of wearing a nightgown like
Grandmother. Grandmother was getting fed up with his nocturnal iniquities, so she gladly offered to buy him a
pair of pajamas if he would reform. Second, he wanted a bed of his own. Grandma didn’t object.
His mother took him to a department store in Brooklyn, winked at the salesgirl, and said, “Here is a
little gentleman who would like to do some shopping.”
The salesgirl made him feel important by saying, “Young man, what can I show you?”
He stood a couple of inches taller and said, “I want to buy a bed for myself.”
When he was shown the one his mother wanted him to buy, she winked at the salesgirl and the boy was
persuaded to buy it.
The bed was delivered the next day; and that night, when Father came home, the little boy ran to the
door shouting, “Daddy! Daddy! Come upstairs and see my bed that I bought!”
The father, looking at the bed, obeyed Charles Schwab’s injunction: he was “hearty in his approbation
and lavish in his praise.”
“You are not going to wet this bed, are you?” the father said. “Oh, no, no! I am not going to wet this
bed.” The boy kept his promise, for his pride was involved. That was his bed. He and he alone had bought it.
And he was wearing pajamas now like a little man. He wanted to act like a man. And he did.
Another father, K. T. Dutschmann, a telephone engineer, a student of this course, couldn’t get his threeyear-old daughter to eat breakfast food. The usual scolding, pleading, coaxing methods had all ended in futility.
So the parents asked themselves, “How can we make her want to do it?”
The little girl loved to imitate her mother, to feel big and grown up; so one morning they put her on a
chair and let her make the breakfast food. At just the psychological moment, Father drifted into the kitchen
while she was stirring the cereal and she said, “Oh, look, Daddy, I am making the cereal this morning.”
She ate two helpings of the cereal without any coaxing, because she was interested in it. She had
achieved a feeling of importance; she had found in making the cereal an avenue of self-expression.
William Winter once remarked that “self-expression is the dominant necessity of human nature.” Why
can’t we adapt this same psychology to business dealings? When we have a brilliant idea, instead of making
31
others think it is ours, why not let them cook and stir the idea themselves. They will then regard it as their own;
they will like it and maybe eat a couple of helpings of it.
Remember: “First, arouse in the other person an eager want. He who can do this has the whole world
with him. He who cannot walks a lonely way."
PRINCIPLE 3
Arouse in the other person an eager want.
In a Nutshell
FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES IN HANDLING PEOPLE
PRINCIPLE 1
Don’t criticize, condemn or complain.
PRINCIPLE 2
Give honest and sincere appreciation.
PRINCIPLE 3
Arouse in the other person an eager want.
32
PART TWO
Six Ways To Make People Like You
33
4
“DO THIS AND YOU’LL BE WELCOME ANYWHERE.”
Why read this book to find out how to win friends? Why not study the technique of the greatest winner
of friends the world has ever known? Who is he? You may meet him tomorrow coming down the street. When
you get within ten feet of him, he will begin to wag his tail. If you stop and pat him, he will almost jump out of
his skin to show you how much he likes you. And you know that behind this show of affection on his part, there
are no ulterior motives: he doesn’t want to sell you any real estate, and he doesn’t want to marry you.
Did you ever stop to think that a dog is the only animal that doesn’t have to work for a living? A hen
has to lay eggs, a cow has to give milk, and a canary has to sing. But a dog makes his living by giving you
nothing but love.
When I was five years old, my father bought a little yellow-haired pup for fifty cents. He was the light
and joy of my childhood. Every afternoon about four-thirty, he would sit in the front yard with his beautiful eyes
staring steadfastly at the path, and as soon as he heard my voice or saw me swinging my dinner pail through the
buck brush, he was off like a shot, racing breathlessly up the hill to greet me with leaps of joy and barks of sheer
ecstasy.
Tippy was my constant companion for five years. Then one tragic night—I shall never forget it—he
was killed within ten feet of my head, killed by lightning. Tippy’s death was the tragedy of my boyhood.
You never read a book on psychology, Tippy. You didn’t need to. You knew by some divine instinct
that you can make more friends in two months by becoming genuinely interested in other people than you can in
two years by trying to get other people interested in you. Let me repeat that. You can make more friends in two
months by becoming interested in other people than you can in two years by trying to get other people interested
in you.
Yet I know and you know people who blunder through life trying to wigwag other people into
becoming interested in them.
Of course, it doesn’t work. People are not interested in you. They are not interested in me. They are
interested in themselves—morning, noon and after dinner.
The New York Telephone Company made a detailed study of telephone conversations to find out
which word is the most frequently used. You have guessed it: it is the personal pronoun “I.” “I.” “I.” It was used
3,900 times in 500 telephone conversations. “I.” “I.” “I.” “I.” When you see a group photograph that you are in,
whose picture do you look for first?
If we merely try to impress people and get people interested in us, we will never have many true,
sincere friends. Friends, real friends, are not made that way.
Napoleon tried it, and in his last meeting with Josephine he said, “Josephine, I have been as fortunate
as any man ever was on this earth; and yet, at this hour, you are the only person in the world on whom I can
rely.” And historians doubt whether he could rely even on her.
Alfred Adler, the famous Viennese psychologist, wrote a book entitled What Life Should Mean to You.
In that book he says, “It is the individual who is not interested in his fellow men who has the greatest difficulties
in life and provides the greatest injury to others. It is from among such individuals that all human failures
spring.”
You may read scores of erudite tomes on psychology without coming across a statement more
significant for you and for me. Adler’s statement is so rich with meaning that I am going to repeat it in italics: It
is the individual who is not interested in his fellow men who has the greatest difficulties in life and provides the
greatest injury to others. It is from among such individuals that all human failures spring.
34
I once took a course in short-story writing at New York University, and during that course the editor of
a leading magazine talked to our class. He said he could pick up any one of the dozens of stories that drifted
across his desk every day and after reading a few paragraphs he could feel whether or not the author liked
people. “If the author doesn’t like people,” he said, “people won’t like his or her stories.”
This hard-boiled editor stopped twice in the course of his talk on fiction writing and apologized for
preaching a sermon. “I am telling you,” he said, “the same things your preacher would tell you, but remember,
you have to be interested in people if you want to be a successful writer of stories.”
If that is true of writing fiction, you can be sure it is true of dealing with people face-to-face.
I spent an evening in the dressing room of Howard Thurston the last time he appeared on Broadway.
Thurston was the acknowledged dean of magicians. For forty years he had traveled all over the world, time and
again, creating illusions, mystifying audiences, and making people gasp with astonishment. More than 60
million people had paid admission to his show, and he had made almost $2 million in profit.
I asked Mr. Thurston to tell me the secret of his success. His schooling certainly had nothing to do with
it, for he ran away from home as a small boy, became a hobo, rode in boxcars, slept in haystacks, begged his
food from door to door, and learned to read by looking out of boxcars at signs along the railway.
Did he have a superior knowledge of magic? No, he told me hundreds of books had been written about
legerdemain and scores of people knew as much about it as he did. But he had two things that the others didn’t
have. First, he had the ability to put his personality across the footlights. He was a master showman. He knew
human nature. Everything he did, every gesture, every intonation of his voice, every lifting of an eyebrow had
been carefully rehearsed in advance, and his actions were timed to split seconds. But, in addition to that,
Thurston had a genuine interest in people. He told me that many magicians would look at the audience and say
to themselves, “Well, there is a bunch of suckers out there, a bunch of hicks; I’ll fool them all right.” But
Thurston’s method was totally different. He told me that every time he went on stage he said to himself, “I am
grateful because these people come to see me. They make it possible for me to make my living in a very
agreeable way. I’m going to give them the very best I possibly can.”
He declared he never stepped in front of the footlights without first saying to himself over and over, “I
love my audience. I love my audience.” Ridiculous? Absurd? You are privileged to think anything you like. I
am merely passing it on to you without comment as a recipe used by one of the most famous magicians of all
time.
George Dyke of North Warren, Pennsylvania, was forced to retire from his service station business
after thirty years when a new highway was constructed over the site of his station. It wasn’t long before the idle
days of retirement began to bore him, so he started filling in his time trying to play music on his old fiddle. Soon
he was traveling the area to listen to music and talk with many of the accomplished fiddlers. In his humble and
friendly way he became generally interested in learning the background and interests of every musician he met.
Although he was not a great fiddler himself, he made many friends in this pursuit. He attended competitions and
soon became known to the country music fans in the eastern part of the United States as “Uncle George, the
Fiddle Scraper from Kinzua County.” When we heard Uncle George, he was seventy-two and enjoying every
minute of his life. By having a sustained interest in other people, he created a new life for himself at a time
when most people consider their productive years over.
That, too, was one of the secrets of Theodore Roosevelt’s astonishing popularity. Even his servants
loved him. His valet, James E. Amos, wrote a book about him entitled Theodore Roosevelt, Hero to His Valet.
In that book Amos relates this illuminating incident:
“My wife one time asked the President about a bobwhite. She had never seen one and he described it to
her fully. Sometime later, the telephone at our cottage rang. [Amos and his wife lived in a little cottage on the
Roosevelt estate at Oyster Bay.] My wife answered it and it was Mr. Roosevelt himself. He had called her, he
said, to tell her that there was a bobwhite outside her window and that if she would look out she might see it.
Little things like that were so characteristic of him. Whenever he went by our cottage, even though we were out
of sight, we would hear him call out, ‘Oo-oo-oo, Annie?’ or ‘Oo-oo-oo, James!’ It was just a friendly greeting as
he went by.”
35
How could employees keep from liking a man like that? How could anyone keep from liking him?
Roosevelt called at the White House one day when the President and Mrs. Taft were away. His honest liking for
humble people was shown by the fact that he greeted all the old White House servants by name, even the
scullery maids.
“When he saw Alice, the kitchen maid,” writes Archie Butt, “he asked her if she still made corn bread.
Alice told him that she sometimes made it for the servants, but no one ate it upstairs.
“‘They show bad taste,’ Roosevelt boomed, ‘and I’ll tell the President so when I see him.’
“Alice brought a piece to him on a plate, and he went over to the office eating it as he went and
greeting gardeners and laborers as he passed…
“He addressed each person just as he had addressed them in the past. Ike Hoover, who had been head
usher at the White House for forty years, said with tears in his eyes, ‘It is the only happy day we had in nearly
two years, and not one of us would exchange it for a hundred-dollar bill.’”
The same concern for the seemingly unimportant people helped sales representative Edward M. Sykes,
Jr., of Chatham, New Jersey, retain an account. “Many years ago,” he reported, “I called on customers for
Johnson and Johnson in the Massachusetts area. One account was a drug store in Hingham. Whenever I went
into this store I would always talk to the soda clerk and sales clerk for a few minutes before talking to the owner
to obtain his order. One day I went up to the owner of the store, and he told me to leave as he was not interested
in buying J&J products anymore because he felt they were concentrating their activities on food and discount
stores to the detriment of the small drugstore. I left with my tail between my legs and drove around the town for
several hours. Finally, I decided to go back and try at least to explain our position to the owner of the store.
“When I returned I walked in and as usual said hello to the soda clerk and sales clerk. When I walked
up to the owner, he smiled at me and welcomed me back. He then gave me double the usual order. I looked at
him with surprise and asked him what had happened since my visit only a few hours earlier. He pointed to the
young man at the soda fountain and said that after I had left, the boy had come over and said that I was one of
the few salespeople that called on the store that even bothered to say hello to him and to the others in the store.
He told the owner that if any salesperson deserved his business, it was I. The owner agreed and remained a loyal
customer. I never forgot that to be genuinely interested in other people is a most important quality for a salesperson to possess—for any person, for that matter.”
I have discovered from personal experience that one can win the attention and time and cooperation of
even the most sought-after people by becoming genuinely interested in them. Let me illustrate.
Years ago I conducted a course in fiction writing at the Brooklyn Institute of Arts and Sciences, and we
wanted such distinguished and busy authors as Kathleen Norris, Fannie Hurst, Ida Tarbell, Albert Payson
Terhune and Rupert Hughes to come to Brooklyn and give us the benefit of their experiences. So we wrote
them, saying we admired their work and were deeply interested in getting their advice and learning the secrets of
their success.
Each of these letters was signed by about a hundred and fifty students. We said we realized that these
authors were busy—too busy to prepare a lecture. So we enclosed a list of questions for them to answer about
themselves and their methods of work. They liked that. Who wouldn’t like it? So they left their homes and
traveled to Brooklyn to give us a helping hand.
By using the same method, I persuaded Leslie M. Shaw, secretary of the treasury in Theodore
Roosevelt’s cabinet; George W. Wickersham, attorney general in Taft’s cabinet; William Jennings Bryan;
Franklin D. Roosevelt and many other prominent men to come to talk to the students of my courses in public
speaking.
All of us, be we workers in a factory, clerks in an office or even a king upon his throne—all of us like
people who admire us. Take the German Kaiser, for example. At the close of World War I he was probably the
most savagely and universally despised man on this earth. Even his own nation turned against him when he fled
over into Holland to save his neck. The hatred against him was so intense that millions of people would have
loved to tear him limb from limb or burn him at the stake. In the midst of all this forest fire of fury, one little boy
wrote the Kaiser a simple, sincere letter glowing with kindliness and admiration. This little boy said that no
36
matter what the others thought, he would always love Wilhelm as his Emperor. The Kaiser was deeply touched
by his letter and invited the little boy to come to see him. The boy came, so did his mother—and the Kaiser
married her. That little boy didn’t need to read a book on how to win friends and influence people. He knew
how instinctively.
If we want to make friends, let’s put ourselves out to do things for other people—things that require
time, energy, unselfishness and thoughtfulness. When the Duke of Windsor was Prince of Wales, he was
scheduled to tour South America, and before he started out on that tour he spent months studying Spanish so
that he could make public talks in the language of the country; and the South Americans loved him for it.
For years I made it a point to find out the birthdays of my friends. How? Although I haven’t the
foggiest bit of faith in astrology, I began by asking the other party whether he believed the date of one’s birth
has anything to do with character and disposition. I then asked him or her to tell me the month and day of birth.
If he or she said November 24, for example, I kept repeating to myself, “November 24, November 24.” The
minute my friend’s back was turned, I wrote down the name and birthday and later would transfer it to a
birthday book. At the beginning of each year, I had these birthday dates scheduled in my calendar pad so that
they came to my attention automatically. When the natal day arrived, there was my letter or telegram. What a hit
it made! I was frequently the only person on earth who remembered.
If we want to make friends, let’s greet people with animation and enthusiasm. When somebody calls
you on the telephone use the same psychology. Say “Hello” in tones that bespeak how pleased YOU are to have
the person call. Many companies train their telephone operators to greet all callers in a tone of voice that
radiates interest and enthusiasm. The caller feels the company is concerned about them. Let’s remember that
when we answer the telephone tomorrow.
Showing a genuine interest in others not only wins friends for you, but may develop in its customers a
loyalty to your company. In an issue of the publication of the National Bank of North America of New York, the
following letter from Madeline Rosedale, a depositor, was published*:
* Eagle, publication of the Natirmal Bank of North America, New York, March 31, 1978.
“I would like you to know how much I appreciate your staff. Everyone is so courteous, polite and
helpful. What a pleasure it is, after waiting on a long line, to have the teller greet you pleasantly.
“Last year my mother was hospitalized for five months. Frequently I went to Marie Petrucello, a teller.
She was concerned about my mother and inquired about her progress.”
Is there any doubt that Mrs. Rosedale will continue to use this bank?
Charles R. Walters, of one of the large banks in New York City, was assigned to prepare a confidential
report on a certain corporation. He knew of only one person who possessed the facts he needed so urgently. As
Mr. Walters was ushered into the president’s office, a young woman stuck her head through a door and told the
president that she didn’t have any stamps for him that day.
"I am collecting stamps for my twelve-year-old son,” the president explained to Mr. Walters.
Mr. Walters stated his mission and began asking questions. The president was vague, general,
nebulous. He didn’t want to talk, and apparently nothing could persuade him to talk. The interview was brief
and barren.
“Frankly, I didn’t know what to do,” Mr. Walters said as he related the story to the class. “Then I
remembered what his secretary had said to him—stamps, twelve-year-old son…and I also recalled that the
foreign department of our bank collected stamps—stamps taken from letters pouring in from every continent
washed by the seven seas.
“The next afternoon I called on this man and sent in word that I had some stamps for his boy. Was I
ushered in with enthusiasm? Yes sir, He couldn’t have shaken my hand with more enthusiasm if he had been
running for Congress. He radiated smiles and goodwill. ‘My George will love this one,’ he kept saying as he
fondled the stamps. ‘And look at this! This is a treasure.’
37
“We spent half an hour talking stamps and looking at a picture of his boy, and he then devoted more
than an hour of his time to giving me every bit of information I wanted—without my even suggesting that he do
it. He told me all he knew, and then called in his subordinates and questioned them. He telephoned some of his
associates. He loaded me down with facts, figures, reports and correspondence. In the parlance of newspaper
reporters, I had a scoop.”
Here is another illustration: C. M. Knaphle, Jr., of Philadelphia had tried for years to sell fuel to a large
chain-store organization. But the chain-store company continued to purchase its fuel from an out-of-town dealer
and haul it right past the door of Knaphle’s office. Mr, Knaphle made a speech one night before one of my
classes, pouring out his hot wrath upon chain stores, branding them as a curse to the nation.
And still he wondered why he couldn’t sell them.
I suggested that he try different tactics. To put it briefly, this is what happened. We staged a debate
between members of the course on whether the spread of the chain store is doing the country more harm than
good.
Knaphle, at my suggestion, took the negative side; he agreed to defend the chain stores, and then went
straight to an executive of the chain-store organization that he despised and said, “I am not here to try to sell
fuel. I have come to ask you to do me a favor.” He then told about his debate and said, “I have come to you for
help because I can’t think of anyone else who would be more capable of giving me the facts I want. I’m anxious
to win this debate, and I’ll deeply appreciate whatever help you can give me.”
Here is the rest of the story in Mr. Knaphle’s own words: “I had asked this man for precisely one
minute of his time. It was with that understanding that he consented to see me. After I had stated my case, he
motioned me to a chair and talked to me for exactly one hour and forty-seven minutes. He called in another
executive who had written a book on chain stores. He wrote to the National Chain Store Association and secured
for me a copy of a debate on the subject. He feels that the chain store is rendering a real service to humanity. He
is proud of what he is doing for hundreds of communities. His eyes fairly glowed as he talked, and I must
confess that he opened my eyes to things I had never even dreamed of. He changed my whole mental attitude.
As I was leaving, he walked with me to the door, put his arm around my shoulder, wished me well in my debate,
and asked me to stop in and see him again and let him know how I made out. The last words he said to me were:
‘Please see me again later in the spring. I should like to place an order with you for fuel.’”
To me that was almost a miracle. Here he was offering to buy fuel without my even suggesting it. I had
made more headway in two hours by becoming genuinely interested in him and his problems than I could have
made in ten years trying to get him interested in me and my product.
You didn’t discover a new truth, Mr. Knaphle, for a long time ago, a hundred years before Christ was
born a famous old Roman poet, Publilius Syrus, remarked, “We are interested in others when they are interested
in us.”
A show of interest, as with every other principle of human relations, must be sincere. It must pay off
not only for the person showing the interest, but for the person receiving the attention. It is a two-way streetboth parties benefit.
Martin Ginsberg, who took our Course in Long Island New York, reported how the special interest a
nurse took in him profoundly affected his life:
“It was Thanksgiving Day and I was ten years old. I was in a welfare ward of a city hospital and was
scheduled to undergo major orthopedic surgery the next day. I knew that I could only look forward to months of
confinement, convalescence and pain. My father was dead; my mother and I lived alone in a small apartment
and we were on welfare. My mother was unable to visit me that day.
“As the day went on, I became overwhelmed with the feeling of loneliness, despair and fear. I knew my
mother was home alone worrying about me, not having anyone to be with, not having anyone to eat with and not
even having enough money to afford a Thanksgiving Day dinner.
“The tears welled up in my eyes, and I stuck my head under the pillow and pulled the covers over it, I
cried silently, but oh so bitterly, so much that my body racked with pain.
38
“A young student nurse heard my sobbing and came over to me. She took the covers off my face and
started wiping my tears. She told me how lonely she was, having to work that day and not being able to be with
her family. She asked me whether I would have dinner with her. She brought two trays of food: sliced turkey,
mashed a potatoes, cranberry sauce and ice cream for dessert. She talked to me and tried to calm my fears. Even
though she was scheduled to go off duty at 4 P.M., she stayed on her own time until almost 11 P.M. She played
games with me, talked to me and stayed with me until I finally fell asleep.
“Many Thanksgivings have come and gone since I was ten, but one never passes without me
remembering that particular one and my feelings of frustration, fear, loneliness and the warmth and tenderness
of the stranger that somehow made it all bearable.”
If you want others to like you, if you want to develop real friendships, if you want to help others at the
same time as you help yourself, keep this principle in mind:
PRINCIPLE 1
Become genuinely interested in other people.
39
5
“A SIMPLE WAY TO MAKE A GOOD IMPRESSION.”
At a dinner party in New York, one of the guests, a woman who had inherited money, was eager to
make a pleasing impression on everyone. She had squandered a modest fortune on sables, diamonds and pearls.
But she hadn’t done anything whatever about her face. It radiated sourness and selfishness. She didn’t realize
what everyone knows: namely, that the expression one wears on one’s face is far more important than the
clothes one wears on one’s back.
Charles Schwab told me his smile had been worth a million dollars. And he was probably understating
the truth. For Schwab’s personality, his charm, his ability to make people like him, were almost wholly
responsible for his extraordinary success; and one of the most delightful factors in his personality was his
captivating smile.
Actions speak louder than words, and a smile says, “I like you. You make me happy. I am glad to see
you.” That is why dogs make such a hit. They are so glad to see us that they almost jump out of their skins. So,
naturally, we are glad to see them.
A baby’s smile has the same effect.
Have you ever been in a doctor’s waiting room and looked around at all the glum faces waiting
impatiently to be seen? Dr, Stephen K. Sproul, a veterinarian in Raytown, Missouri, told of a typical spring day
when his waiting room was full of clients waiting to have their pets inoculated. No one was talking to anyone
else, and all were probably thinking of a dozen other things they would rather be doing than “wasting time”
sitting in that office. He told one of our classes, “There were six or seven clients waiting when a young woman
came in with a nine-month-old baby and a kitten. As luck would have it, she sat down next to a gentleman who
was more than a little distraught about the long wait for service. The next thing he knew, the baby just looked up
at him with that great big smile that is so characteristic of babies. What did that gentleman do? Just what you
and I would do, of course: he smiled back at the baby. Soon he struck up a conversation with the woman about
her baby and his grandchildren, and soon the entire reception room joined in, and the boredom and tension were
converted into a pleasant and enjoyable experience.”
An insincere grin? No. That doesn’t fool anybody. We know it is mechanical and we resent it. I am
talking about a real smile, a heartwarming smile, a smile that comes from within, the kind of smile that will
bring a good price in the marketplace.
Professor James V. McConnell, a psychologist at the University of Michigan, expressed his feelings
about a smile. “People who smile,” he said, “tend to manage teach and sell more effectively, and to raise happier
children. There’s far more information in a smile than a frown. That’s why encouragement is a much more
effective teaching device than punishment.”
The employment manager of a large New York department store told me she would rather hire a sales
clerk who hadn’t finished grade school, if he or she has a pleasant smile, than to hire a doctor of philosophy with
a somber face.
The effect of a smile is powerful, even when it is unseen. Telephone companies throughout the United
States have a program called “phone power” which is offered to employees who use the telephone for selling
their services or products. In this program they suggest that you smile when talking on the phone. Your ‘smile’
comes through in your voice.
Robert Cryer, manager of a computer department for a Cincinnati, Ohio, company, told how he had
successfully found the right applicant for a hard-to-fill position, “I was desperately trying to recruit a Ph.D. in
computer science for my department. I finally located a young man with ideal qualifications who was about to
be graduated from Purdue University. After several phone conversations I learned that he had several offers
from other companies, many of them larger and better known than mine. I was delighted when he accepted my
40
offer. After he started on the job, I asked him why he had chosen us over the others. He paused for a moment
and then he said, ‘I think it was because managers in the other companies spoke on the phone in a cold,
business-like manner, which made me feel like just another business transaction. Your voice sounded as if you
were glad to hear from me…that you really wanted me to be part of your organization.’ You can be assured, I
am still answering my phone with a smile.”
The chairman of the board of directors of one of the largest rubber companies ‘in the United States told
me that, according to his observations, people rarely succeed at anything unless they have fun doing it. This
industrial leader doesn’t put much faith in the old adage that hard work alone is the magic key that will unlock
the door to our desires, “I have known people,” he said, “who succeeded because they had a rip-roaring good
time conducting their business. Later, I saw those people change as the fun became work. The business had
grown dull, they lost all joy in it, and they failed.”
You must have a good time meeting people if you expect them to have a good time meeting you.
I have asked thousands of business people to smile at someone every hour of the day for a week and
then come to class and talk about the results. How did it work? Let’s see…Here is a letter from William B.
Steinhardt, a New York stockbroker. His case isn’t isolated. In fact, it is typical of hundreds of cases.
“1 have been married for over eighteen years,” wrote Mr. Steinhardt, “and in all that time I seldom
smiled at my wife or spoke two dozen words to her from the time I got up until I was ready to leave for
business. I was one of the worst grouches who ever walked down Broadway.
“When you asked me to make a talk about my experience with smiles, I thought I would try it for a
week. So the next morning, while combing my hair, I looked at my glum mug in the mirror and said to myself,
‘Bill, you are going to wipe the scowl off that sour puss of yours today. You are going to smile. And you are
going to begin right now.’ As I sat down to breakfast, I greeted my wife with a ‘Good morning, my dear,’ and
smiled as I said it.
“You warned me that she might be surprised. Well, you underestimated her reaction. She was
bewildered. She was shocked. I told her that in the future she could expect this as a regular occurrence, and I
kept it up every morning.
“This changed attitude of mine brought more happiness into our home in the two months since I started
than there was during the last year.
“As I leave for my office, I greet the elevator operator in the apartment house with a ‘Good morning’
and a smile, I greet the doorman with a smile. I smile at the cashier in the subway booth when I ask for change.
As I stand on the floor of the Stock Exchange, I smile at people who until recently never saw me smile.
“I soon found that everybody was smiling back at me, I treat those who come to me with complaints or
grievances in a cheerful manner, I smile as I listen to them and I find that adjustments are accomplished much
easier. I find that smiles are bringing me dollars, many dollars every day.
“I share my office with another broker. One of his clerks is a likable young chap, and I was so elated
about the results I was getting that I told him recently about my new philosophy of human relations. He then
confessed that when I first came to share my office with his firm he thought me a terrible grouch, and only
recently changed his mind. He said I was really human when I smiled.
“I have also eliminated criticism from my system. I give appreciation and praise now instead of
condemnation. I have stopped talking about what I want. I am now trying to see the other person’s viewpoint.
And these things have literally revolutionized my life. I am a totally different man, a happier man, a richer man,
richer in friendships and happiness—the only things that matter much after all.”
You don’t feel like smiling? Then what? Two things. First, force yourself to smile. If you are alone,
force yourself to whistle or hum a tune or sing. Act as if you were already happy, and that will tend to make you
happy. Here is the way the psychologist and philosopher William James put it:
“Action seems to follow feeling, but really action and feeling go together; and by regulating the action,
which is under the more direct control of the will, we can indirectly regulate the feeling, which is not.
41
“Thus the sovereign voluntary path to cheerfulness, if our cheerfulness be lost, is to sit up cheerfully
and to act and speak as if cheerfulness were already there…”
Everybody in the world is seeking happiness, and there is one sure way to find it. That is by controlling
your thoughts. Happiness doesn’t depend on outward conditions. It depends on inner conditions.
It isn’t what you have or who you are or where you are or what you are doing that makes you happy or
unhappy. It is what you think about it. For example, two people may be in the same place, doing the same thing;
both may have about an equal amount of money and prestige, and yet one may be miserable and the other
happy.
Why? Because of a different mental attitude. I have seen just as many happy faces among the poor
peasants toiling with their primitive tools in the devastating heat of the tropics as I have seen in air-conditioned
offices in New York, Chicago or Los Angeles.
“There is nothing either good or bad,” said Shakespeare, “but thinking makes it so.”
Abe Lincoln once remarked that “most folks are about as happy as they make up their minds to be.” He
was right. I saw a vivid illustration of that truth as I was walking up the stairs of the Long Island Railroad station
in New York. Directly in front of me thirty or forty crippled boys on canes and crutches were struggling up the
stairs. One boy had to be carried up. I was astonished at their laughter and gaiety. I spoke about it to one of.the
men in charge of the boys. “Oh, yes,” he said, “when a boy realizes that he is going to be a cripple for life, he is
shocked at first; but after he gets over the shock, he usually resigns himself to his fate and then becomes as
happy as normal boys.”
I felt like taking my hat off to those boys. They taught me a lesson I hope I shall never forget.
Working all by oneself in a closed-off room in an office not only is lonely, but it denies one the
opportunity of making friends with other employees in the company. Señora Maria Gonzalez of Guadalajara,
Mexico, had such a job. She envied the shared comradeship of other people in the company as she heard their
chatter and laughter. As she passed them in the hall during the first weeks of her employment, she shyly looked
the other way.
After a few weeks, she said to herself, “Maria, you can’t expect those women to come to you. You
have to go out and meet them.” The next time she walked to the water cooler, she put on her brightest smile and
said, “Hi, how are you today?” to each of the people she met. The effect was immediate. Smiles and hellos were
returned, the hallway seemed brighter, the job friendlier.
Acquaintanceships developed and some ripened into friendships. Her job and her life became more
pleasant and interesting.
Peruse this bit of sage advice from the essayist and publisher Elbert Hubbard, but remember, perusing
it won’t do you any good unless you apply it:
Whenever you go out-of-doors, draw the chin in, carry the crown of the head high, and fill the lungs to
the utmost; drink in the sunshine; greet your friends with a smile, and put soul into every handclasp. Do not fear
being misunderstood and do not waste a minute thinking about your enemies. Try to fix firmly in your mind
what you would like to do; and then, without veering off direction, you will move straight to the goal. Keep your
mind on the great and splendid things you would like to do, and then, as the days go gliding away, you will find
yourself unconsciously seizing upon the opportunities that are required for the fulfillment of your desire, just as
the coral insect takes from the running tide the element it needs. Picture in your mind the able, earnest, useful
person you desire to be, and the thought you hold is hourly transforming you into that particular individual…
Thought is supreme. Preserve a right mental attitude—the attitude of courage, frankness, and good
cheer. To think rightly is to create. All things come through desire and every sincere prayer is answered. We
become like that on which our hearts are fixed. Carry your chin in and the crown of your head high. We are
gods in the chrysalis.
42
The ancient Chinese were a wise lot—wise in the ways of the world; and they had a proverb that you
and I ought to cut out and paste inside our hats. It goes like this: “A man without a smiling face must not open a
shop.”
Your smile is a messenger of your goodwill. Your smile brightens the lives of all who see it. To
someone who has seen a dozen people frown, scowl or turn their faces away, your smile is like the sun breaking
through the clouds. Especially when that someone is under pressure from his bosses, his customers, his teachers
or parents or children, a smile can help him realize that all is not hopeless—that there is joy in the world.
Some years ago, a department store in New York City, in recognition of the pressures its sales clerks
were under during the Christmas rush, presented the readers of its advertisements with the following homely
philosophy:
THE VALUE OF A SMILE AT CHRISTMAS
It costs nothing, but creates much.
It enriches those who receive, without impoverishing those who give.
It happens in a flash and the memory of it sometimes lasts forever,
None are so rich they can get along without it, and none so poor but are richer for its benefits.
It creates happiness in the home, fosters goodwill in a business, and is the countersign of friends.
It is rest to the weary, daylight to the discouraged, sunshine to the sad, and Nature’s best antidote fee trouble.
Yet it cannot be bought, begged, borrowed, or stolen, for it is something that is no earthly good to anybody till it
is given away.
And if in the last-minute rush of Christmas buying some of our salespeople should be too tired to give you a
smile, may we ask you to leave one of yours?
For nobody needs a smile so much as those who have none left to give!
PRINCIPLE 2
Smile.
43
6
“IF YOU DON’T DO THIS, YOU ARE HEADED FOR
TROUBLE.”
Back in 1898, a tragic thing happened in Rockland County, New York. A child had died, and on this
particular day the neighbors were preparing to go to the funeral.
Jim Farley went out to the barn to hitch up his horse. The ground was covered with snow, the air was
cold and snappy; the horse hadn’t been exercised for days; and as he was led out to the watering trough, he
wheeled playfully, kicked both his heels high in the air, and killed Jim Farley. So the little village of Stony Point
had two funerals that week instead of one.
Jim Farley left behind him a widow and three boys, and a few hundred dollars in insurance.
His oldest boy, Jim, was ten, and he went to work in a brickyard, wheeling sand and pouring it into the
molds and turning the brick on edge to be dried by the sun. This boy Jim never had a chance to get much
education. But with his natural geniality, he had a flair for making people like him, so he went into politics, and
as the years went by, he developed an uncanny ability for remembering people’s names.
He never saw the inside of a high school; but before he was forty-six years of age, four colleges had
honored him with degrees and he had become chairman of the Democratic National Committee and Postmaster
General of the United States.
I once interviewed Jim Farley and asked him the secret of his success. He said, “Hard work,” and I
said, “Don’t be funny.”
He then asked me what I thought was the reason for his success. I replied, "I understand you can call
ten thousand people by their first names.”
“No. You are wrong, " he said. “I can call fifty thousand people by their first names.”
Make no mistake about it. That ability helped Mr. Farley put Franklin D. Roosevelt in the White House
when he managed Roosevelt’s campaign in 1932.
During the years that Jim Farley traveled as a salesman for a gypsum concern, and during the years that
he held office as town clerk in Stony Point, he built up a system for remembering names.
In the beginning, it was a very simple one. Whenever he met a new acquaintance, he found out his or
her complete name and some facts about his or her family, business and political opinions. He fixed all these
facts well in mind as part of the picture, and the next time he met that person, even if it was a year later, he was
able to shake hands, inquire after the family, and ask about the hollyhocks in the backyard. No wonder he
developed a following!
For months before Roosevelt’s campaign for President began, Jim Farley wrote hundreds of letters a
day to people all over the western and northwestern states. Then he hopped onto a train and in nineteen days
covered twenty states and twelve thousand miles, traveling by buggy, train, automobile and boat. He would drop
into town, meet his people at lunch or breakfast, tea or dinner, and give them a “heart-to-heart talk.” Then he’d
dash off again on another leg of his journey.
As soon as he arrived back East, he wrote to one person in each town he had visited, asking for a list of
all the guests to whom he had talked. The final list contained thousands and thousands of names; yet each
person on that list was paid the subtle flattery of getting a personal letter from James Farley. These letters began
“Dear Bill” or “Dear Jane,” and they were always signed “Jim”.
44
Jim Farley discovered early in life that the average person is more interested in his or her own name
than in all the other names on earth put together. Remember that name and call it easily, and you have paid a
subtle and very effective compliment. But forget it or misspell it—and you have placed yourself at a sharp
disadvantage. For example, I once organized a public-speaking course in Paris and sent form letters to all the
American residents in the city. French typists with apparently little knowledge of English filled in the names and
naturally they made blunders. One man, the manager of a large American bank in Paris, wrote me a scathing
rebuke because his name had been misspelled.
Sometimes it is difficult to remember a name, particularly if it is hard to pronounce. Rather than even
try to learn it, many people ignore it or call the person by an easy nickname. Sid Levy called on a customer for
some time whose name was Nicodemus Papadoulos. Most people just called him “Nick.” Levy told us, “I made
a special effort to say his name over several times to myself before I made my call. When I greeted him by his
full name, ‘Good afternoon, Mr. Nicodemus Papadoulos,’ he was shocked. For what seemed like several
minutes there was no reply from him at all. Finally, he said with tears rolling down his cheeks, ‘Mr. Levy, in all
the fifteen years I have been in this country, nobody has ever made the effort to call me by my right name.’”
What was the reason for Andrew Carnegie’s success?
He was called the Steel King; yet he himself knew little about the manufacture of steel. He had
hundreds of people working for him who knew far more about steel than he did.
But he knew how to handle people, and that is what made him rich. Early in life, he showed a flair for
organization, a genius for leadership. By the time he was ten, he too had discovered the astounding importance
people place on their own name. And he used that discovery to win cooperation. To illustrate: When he was a
boy back in Scotland, he got hold of a rabbit, a mother rabbit. Presto! He soon had a whole nest of little
rabbits—and nothing to feed them. But he had a brilliant idea. He told the boys and girls in the neighborhood
that if they would go out and pull enough clover and dandelions to feed the rabbits, he would name the bunnies
in their honor.
The plan worked like magic, and Carnegie never forgot it.
Years later, he made millions by using the same psychology in business. For example, he wanted to sell
steel rails to the Pennsylvania Railroad. J. Edgar Thomson was the president of the Pennsylvania Railroad then.
So Andrew Carnegie built a huge steel mill in Pittsburgh and called it the “Edgar Thomson Steel Works”.
Here is a riddle. See if you can guess it. When the Pennsylvania Railroad needed steel rails, where do
you suppose J. Edgar Thomson bought them…from Sears, Roebuck? No. No. You’re wrong. Guess again.
When Carnegie and George Pullman were battling each other for supremacy in the railroad sleeping-car
business, the Steel King again remembered the lesson of the rabbits.
The Central Transportation Company, which Andrew Carnegie controlled, was fighting with the
company that Pullman owned. Both were struggling to get the sleeping-car business of the Union Pacific
Railroad, bucking each other, slashing prices, and destroying all chance of profit. Both Carnegie and Pullman
had gone to New York to see the board of directors of the Union Pacific. Meeting one evening in the St.
Nicholas Hotel, Carnegie said, “Good evening, Mr. Pullman, aren’t we making a couple of fools of ourselves?”
“What do you mean?" Pullman demanded.
Then Carnegie expressed what he had on his mind—a merger of their two interests. He pictured in
glowing terms the mutual advantages of working with, instead of against, each other. Pullman listened
attentively, but he was not wholly convinced. Finally he asked, “What would you call the new company?” and
Carnegie replied promptly, “Why, the Pullman Palace Car Company, of course.”
Pullman’s face brightened. “Come into my room,” he said. “Let’s talk it over.” That talk made
industrial history.
This policy of remembering and honoring the names of his friends and business associates was one of
the secrets of Andrew Carnegie’s leadership. He was proud of the fact that he could call many of his factory
workers by their first names, and he boasted that while he was personally in charge, no strike ever disturbed his
flaming steel mills.
45
Benton Love, chairman of Texas Commerce Bankshares, believes that the bigger a corporation gets,
the colder it becomes. “One way to warm it up,” he said, “is to remember people’s names. The executive who
tells me he can’t remember names is at the same time telling me he can’t remember a significant part of his
business and is operating on quicksand.”
Karen Kirsech of Rancho Palos Verdes, California, a flight attendant for TWA, made it a practice to
learn the names of as many passengers in her cabin as possible and use the name when serving them. This
resulted in many compliments on her service expressed both to her directly and to the airline. One passenger
wrote, “I haven’t flown TWA for some time, but I’m going to start flying nothing but TWA from now on. You
make me feel that your airline has become a very personalized airline and that is important to me.”
People are so proud of their names that they strive to perpetuate them at any cost. Even blustering,
hard-boiled old P. T. Barnum, the greatest showman of his time, disappointed because he had no sons to carry
on his name, offered his grandson, C. H. Seeley, $25,000 dollars if he would call himself “Barnum” Seeley.
For many centuries, nobles and magnates supported artists, musicians and authors so that their creative
works would be dedicated to them.
Libraries and museums owe their richest collections to people who cannot bear to think that their
names might perish from the memory of the race. The New York Public Library has its Astor and Lenox
collections. The Metropolitan Museum perpetuates the names of Benjamin Altman and J. P. Morgan. And
nearly every church is beautified by stained-glass windows commemorating the names of their donors. Many of
the buildings on the campus of most universities bear the names of donors who contributed large sums of money
for this honor.
Most people don’t remember names, for the simple reason that they don’t take the time and energy
necessary to concentrate and repeat and fix names indelibly in their minds. They make excuses for themselves;
they are too busy.
But they were probably no busier than Franklin D. Roosevelt, and he took time to remember and recall
even the names of mechanics with whom he came into contact.
To illustrate: The Chrysler organization built a special car for Mr. Roosevelt, who could not use a
standard car because his legs were paralyzed. W. F. Chamberlain and a mechanic delivered it to the White
House. I have in front of me a letter from Mr. Chamberlain relating his experiences. "I taught President
Roosevelt how to handle a car with a lot of unusual gadgets, but he taught me a lot about the fine art of handling
people.
“When I called at the White House,” Mr. Chamberlain writes, “the President was extremely pleasant
and cheerful. He called me by name, made me feel very comfortable, and particularly impressed me with the
fact that he was vitally interested in things I had to show him and tell him. The car was so designed that it could
be operated entirely by hand. A crowd gathered around to look at the car; and he remarked, ‘I think it is
marvelous. All you have to do is to touch a button and it moves away and you can drive it without effort. I think
it is grand—I don’t know what makes it go. I’d love to have the time to tear it down and see how it works.’
“When Roosevelt’s friends and associates admired the machine, he said in their presence: ‘Mr.
Chamberlain, I certainly appreciate all the time and effort you have spent in developing this car. It is a mighty
fine job.’ He admired the radiator, the special rear-vision mirror and clock, the special spotlight, the kind of
upholstery, the sitting position of the driver’s seat, the special suitcases in the trunk with his monogram on each
suitcase. In other words, he took notice of every detail to which he knew I had given considerable thought. He
made a point of bringing these various pieces of equipment to the attention of Mrs. Roosevelt, Miss Perkins, the
Secretary of Labor, and his secretary. He even brought the old White House porter into the picture by saying,
‘George, you want to take particularly good care of the suitcases.’
“When the driving lesson was finished, the President turned to me and said: ‘Well, Mr. Chamberlain, I
have been keeping the Federal Reserve Board waiting thirty minutes. I guess I had better get back to work.’
“I took a mechanic with me to the White House. He was introduced to Roosevelt when he arrived. He
didn’t talk to the President, and Roosevelt heard his name only once. He was a shy chap, and he kept in the
background. But before leaving us, the President looked for the mechanic, shook his hand, called him by name,
46
and thanked him for coming to Washington. And there was nothing perfunctory about his thanks. He meant
what he said. I could feel that.
“A few days after returning to New York, I got an autographed photograph of President Roosevelt and
a little note of thanks again expressing his appreciation for my assistance. How he found time to do it is a
mystery to me.”
Franklin D. Roosevelt knew that one of the simplest, most obvious and most important ways of gaining
good will was by remembering names and making people feel important—yet how many of us do it?
Half the time we are introduced to a stranger, we chat a few minutes and can’t even remember his or
her name by the time we say goodbye.
One of the first lessons a politician learns is this: “To recall a voter’s name is statesmanship. To forget
it is oblivion.”
And the ability to remember names is almost as important in business and social contacts as it is in
politics.
Napoleon the Third, Emperor of France and nephew of the great Napoleon, boasted that in spite of all
his royal duties he could remember the name of every person he met.
His technique? Simple. If he didn’t hear the name distinctly, he said, “So sorry. I didn’t get the name
clearly.” Then, if it was an unusual name, he would say, “How is it spelled?”
During the conversation, he took the trouble to repeat the name several times, and tried to associate it in
his mind with the person’s features, expression and general appearance.
If the person was someone of importance, Napoleon went to even further pains. As soon as His Royal
Highness was alone, he wrote the name down on a piece of paper, looked at it, concentrated on it, fixed it
securely in his mind, and then tore up the paper. In this way, he gained an eye impression of the name as well as
an ear impression.
All this takes time, but “Good manners,” said Emerson, “are made up of petty sacrifices.”
The importance of remembering and using names is not just the prerogative of kings and corporate
executives. It works for all of us. Ken Nottingham, an employee of General Motors in Indiana, usually had
lunch at the company cafeteria. He noticed that the woman who worked behind the counter always had a scowl
on her face. “She had been making sandwiches for about two hours and I was just another sandwich to her. I
told her what I wanted. She weighed out the ham on a little scale, then she gave me one leaf of lettuce, a few
potato chips and handed them to me.
“The next day I went through the same line. Same woman, same scowl. The only difference was I
noticed her name tag. I smiled and said, ‘Hello, Eunice,’ and then told her what I wanted. Well, she forgot the
scale, piled on the ham, gave me three leaves of lettuce and heaped on the potato chips until they fell off the
plate.”
We should be aware of the magic contained in a name and realize that this single item is wholly and
completely owned by the person with whom we are dealing and nobody else. The name sets the individual apart;
it makes him or her unique among all others. The information we are imparting or the request we are making
takes on a special importance when we approach the situation with the name of the individual. From the waitress
to the senior executive, the name will work magic as we deal with others.
PRINCIPLE 3
Remember that a person’s name is to that person the sweetest and most important sound in any language.
47
7
“AN EASY WAY TO BECOME A GOOD
CONVERSATIONALIST.”
Some time ago, I attended a bridge party. I don’t play bridge, and there was a woman there who didn’t
play bridge either. She had discovered that I had once been Lowell Thomas’ manager before he went on the
radio and that I had traveled in Europe a great deal while helping him prepare the illustrated travel talks he was
then delivering. So she said, “Oh, Mr. Carnegie, I do want you to tell me about all the wonderful places you
have visited and the sights you have seen.”
As we sat down on the sofa, she remarked that she and her husband had recently returned from a trip to
Africa. “Africa!” I exclaimed. “How interesting! I’ve always wanted to see Africa, but I never got there except
for a twenty-four-hour stay once in Algiers. Tell me, did you visit the big-game country? Yes? How fortunate. I
envy you. Do tell me about Africa.”
That kept her talking for forty-five minutes. She never again asked me where I had been or what I had
seen. She didn’t want to hear me talk about my travels. All she wanted was an interested listener, so she could
expand her ego and tell about where she had been.
Was she unusual? No. Many people are like that.
For example, I met a distinguished botanist at a dinner party given by a New York book publisher. I
had never talked with a botanist before, and I found him fascinating. I literally sat on the edge of my chair and
listened while he spoke of exotic plants and experiments in developing new forms of plant life and indoor
gardens (and even told me astonishing facts about the humble potato). I had a small indoor garden of my own,
and he was good enough to tell me how to solve some of my problems.
As I said, we were at a dinner party. There must have been a dozen other guests, but I violated all the
canons of courtesy, ignored everyone else, and talked for hours to the botanist.
Midnight came, I said good night to everyone and departed. The botanist then turned to our host and
paid me several flattering compliments. I was “most stimulating”. I was this and I was that, and he ended by
saying I was a “most interesting conversationalist”.
An interesting conversationalist? Why, I had said hardly anything at all. I couldn’t have said anything if
I had wanted to without changing the subject, for I didn’t know any more about botany than I knew about the
anatomy of a penguin. But I had done this: I had listened intently. I had listened because I was genuinely
interested. And he felt it. Naturally that pleased him. That kind of listening is one of the highest compliments we
can pay anyone. “Few human beings,” wrote Jack Woodford in Strangers in Love, “few human beings are proof
against the implied flattery of rapt attention.” I went even further than giving him rapt attention. I was “hearty in
my approbation and lavish in my praise.”
I told him that I had been immensely entertained and instructed—and I had. I told him I wished I had
his knowledge—and I did. I told him that I should love to wander the fields with him—and I have. I told him I
must see him again—and I did.
And so I had him thinking of me as a good conversationalist when, in reality, I had been merely a good
listener and had encouraged him to talk.
What is the secret, the mystery, of a successful business interview? Well, according to former Harvard
president Charles W. Eliot, “There is no mystery about successful business intercourse…Exclusive attention to
the person who is speaking to you is very important. Nothing else is so flattering as that.”
Eliot himself was a past master of the art of listening. Henry James, one of America’s first great
novelists, recalled: “Dr. Eliot’s listening was not mere silence, but a form of activity. Sitting very erect on the
48
end of his spine with hands joined in his lap, making no movement except that he revolved his thumbs around
each other faster or slower, he faced his interlocutor and seemed to be hearing with his eyes as well as his ears.
He listened with his mind and attentively considered what you had to say while you said it. At the end of an
interview the person who had talked to him felt that he had had his say.”
Self-evident, isn’t it? You don’t have to study for four years in Harvard to discover that. Yet I know
and you know department store owners who will rent expensive space, buy their goods economically, dress their
windows appealingly, spend thousands of dollars in advertising and then hire clerks who haven’t the sense to be
good listeners—clerks who interrupt customers, contradict them, irritate them, and all but drive them from the
store.
A department store in Chicago almost lost a regular customer who spent several thousand dollars each
year in that store because a sales clerk wouldn’t listen. Mrs. Henrietta Douglas, who took our course in Chicago,
had purchased a coat at a special sale. After she had brought it home she noticed that there was a tear in the
lining. She came back the next day and asked the sales clerk to exchange it. The clerk refused even to listen to
her complaint. “You bought this at a special sale,” she said. She pointed to a sign on the wall. “Read that,” she
exclaimed. “‘All sales are final.’ Once you bought it, you have to keep it. Sew up the lining yourself.”
“But this was damaged merchandise,” Mrs. Douglas complained.
“Makes no difference,” the clerk interrupted. “Final’s final.”
Mrs. Douglas was about to walk out indignantly, swearing never to return to that store ever, when she
was greeted by the department manager, who knew her from her many years of patronage. Mrs. Douglas told
her what had happened.
The manager listened attentively to the whole story, examined the coat and then said, “Special sales are
‘final’ so we can dispose of merchandise at the end of the season. But this ‘no return’ policy does not apply to
damaged goods. We will certainly repair or replace the lining, or if you prefer, give you your money back.”
What a difference in treatment! If that manager had not come along and listened to the Customer, a
long-term patron of that store could have been lost forever.
Listening is just as important in one’s home life as in the world of business. Millie Esposito of Crotonon-Hudson, New York, made it her business to listen carefully when one of her children wanted to speak with
her. One evening she was sitting in the kitchen with her son, Robert, and after a brief discussion of something
that was on his mind, Robert said, “Mom, I know that you love me very much.”
Mrs. Esposito was touched and said, “Of course I love you very much. Did you doubt it?”
Robert responded, “No, but I really know you love me because whenever I want to talk to you about
something you stop whatever you are doing and listen to me.”
The chronic kicker, even the most violent critic, will frequently soften and be subdued in the presence
of a patient, sympathetic listener—a listener who will he silent while the irate fault-finder dilates like a king
cobra and spews the poison out of his system. To illustrate: The New York Telephone Company discovered a
few years ago that it had to deal with one of the most vicious customers who ever cursed a customer service
representative. And he did curse. He raved. He threatened to tear the phone out by its roots. He refused to pay
certain charges that he declared were false. He wrote letters to the newspapers. He filed innumerable complaints
with the Public Service Commission, and he started several suits against the telephone company.
At last, one of the company’s most skillful ‘troubleshooters’ was sent to interview this stormy petrel.
This “troubleshooter” listened and let the cantankerous customer enjoy himself pouring out his tirade. The
telephone representative listened and said ‘yes’ and sympathized with his grievance.
“He raved on and I listened for nearly three hours,” the ‘troubleshooter’ said as he related his
experiences before one of the author’s classes. “Then I went back and listened some more. I interviewed him
four times, and before the fourth visit was over I had become a charter member of an organization he was
starting. He called it the ‘Telephone Subscribers’ Protective Association.’ I am still a member of this
organization, and, so far as I know, I’m the only member in the world today besides Mr. ----.
49
“I listened and sympathized with him on every point that he made during these interviews. He had
never had a telephone representative talk with him that way before, and he became almost friendly. The point on
which I went to see him was not even mentioned on the first visit, nor was it mentioned on the second or third,
but upon the fourth interview, I closed the case completely, he paid all his bills in full, and for the first time in
the history of his difficulties with the telephone company he voluntarily withdrew his complaints from the
Public Service Commission.”
Doubtless Mr. ----- had considered himself a holy crusader, defending the public rights against callous
exploitation. But in reality, what he had really wanted was a feeling of importance. He got this feeling of
importance at first by kicking and complaining. But as soon as he got his feeling of importance from a
representative of the company, his imagined grievances vanished into thin air.
One morning years ago, an angry customer stormed into the office of Julian F. Detmer, founder of the
Detmer Woolen Company, which later became the world’s largest distributor of woolens to the tailoring trade.
“This man owed us a small sum of money,” Mr. Detmer explained to me. “The customer denied it, but
we knew he was wrong. So our credit department had insisted that he pay. After getting a number of letters from
our credit department, he packed his grip, made a trip to Chicago, and hurried into my office to inform me not
only that he was not going to pay that bill, but that he was never going to buy another dollar’s worth of goods
from the Detmer Woolen Company.
“I listened patiently to all he had to say. I was tempted to interrupt, but I realized that would be bad
policy, so I let him talk himself out. When he finally simmered down and got in a receptive mood, I said quietly,
‘I want to thank you for coming to Chicago to tell me about this. You have done me a great favor, for if our
credit department has annoyed you, it may annoy other good customers, and that would be just too bad. Believe
me, I am far more eager to hear this than you are to tell it.’
“That was the last thing in the world he expected me to say. I think he was a trifle disappointed,
because he had come to Chicago to tell me a thing or two, but here I was thanking him instead of scrapping with
him. I assured him we would wipe the charge off the books and forget it, because he was a very careful man
with only one account to look after, while our clerks had to look after thousands. Therefore, he was less likely to
be wrong than we were.
“I told him that I understood exactly how he felt and that, if I were in his shoes, I should undoubtedly
feel precisely as he did. Since he wasn’t going to buy from us anymore, I recommended some other woolen
houses.
“In the past, we had usually lunched together when he came to Chicago, so I invited him to have lunch
with me this day. He accepted reluctantly, but when we came back to the office he placed a larger order than
ever before. He returned home in a softened mood and, wanting to be just as fair with us as we had been with
him, looked over his bills, found one that had been mislaid, and sent us a check with his apologies.
“Later, when his wife presented him with a baby boy, he gave his son the middle name of Detmer, and
he remained a friend and customer of the house until his death twenty-two years afterwards.”
Years ago, a poor Dutch immigrant boy washed the windows of a bakery shop after school to help
support his family. His people were so poor that in addition he used to go out in the street with a basket every
day and collect stray bits of coal that had fallen in the gutter where the coal wagons had delivered fuel. That
boy, Edward Bok, never got more than six years of schooling in his life; yet eventually he made himself one of
the most successful magazine editors in the history of American journalism. How did he do it? That is a long
story, but how he got his start can be told briefly. He got his start by using the principles advocated in this
chapter.
He left school when he was thirteen and became an office boy for Western Union, but he didn’t for one
moment give up the idea of an education. Instead, he started to educate himself, He saved his car fares and went
without lunch until he had enough money to buy an encyclopedia of American biography—and then he did an
unheard-of thing. He read the lives of famous people and wrote them asking for additional information about
their childhoods. He was a good listener. He asked famous people to tell him more about themselves. He wrote
General James A. Garfield, who was then running for President, and asked if it was true that he was once a tow
50
boy on a canal; and Garfield replied. He wrote General Grant asking about a certain battle, and Grant drew a
map for him and invited this fourteen-year old boy to dinner and spent the evening talking to him.
Soon our Western Union messenger boy was corresponding with many of the most famous people in
the nation: Ralph Waldo Emerson, Oliver Wendell Holmes, Longfellow, Mrs. Abraham Lincoln, Louisa May
Alcott, General Sherman and Jefferson Davis. Not only did he correspond with these distinguished people, but
as soon as he got a vacation, he visited many of them as a welcome guest in their homes. This experience
imbued him with a confidence that was invaluable. These men and women fired him with a vision and ambition
that shaped his life. And all this, let me repeat, was made possible solely by the application of the principles we
are discussing here.
Isaac F. Marcosson, a journalist who interviewed hundreds of celebrities, declared that many people
fail to make a favorable impression because they don’t listen attentively. “They have been so much concerned
with what they are going to say next that they do not keep their ears open. Very important people have told me
that they prefer good listeners to good talkers, but the ability to listen seems rarer than almost any other good
trait.”
And not only important personages crave a good listener, but ordinary folk do too. As the Reader’s
Digest once said, “Many persons call a doctor when all they want is an audience.”
During the darkest hours of the Civil War, Lincoln wrote to an old friend in Springfield, Illinois, asking
him to come to Washington. Lincoln said he had some problems he wanted to discuss with him. The old
neighbor called at the White House, and Lincoln talked to him for hours about the advisability of issuing a
proclamation freeing the slaves. Lincoln went over all the arguments for and against such a move, and then read
letters and newspaper articles, some denouncing him for not freeing the slaves and others denouncing him for
fear he was going to free them. After talking for hours, Lincoln shook hands with his old neighbor, said good
night, and sent him back to Illinois without even asking for his opinion. Lincoln had done all the talking himself.
That seemed to clarify his mind. “He seemed to feel easier after that talk,” the old friend said. Lincoln hadn’t
wanted advice. He had wanted merely a friendly, sympathetic listener to whom he could unburden himself.
That’s what we all want when we are in trouble. That is frequently all the irritated customer wants, and the
dissatisfied employee or the hurt friend.
One of the great listeners of modern times was Sigmund Freud. A man who met Freud described his
manner of listening, “It struck me so forcibly that I shall never forget him. He had qualities which I had never
seen in any other man. Never had I seen such concentrated attention. There was none of that piercing ‘soulpenetrating gaze’ business. His eyes were mild and genial. His voice was low and kind. His gestures were few.
But the attention he gave me, his appreciation of what I said, even when I said it badly, was extraordinary.
You've no idea what it meant to be listened to like that.”
If you want to know how to make people shun you and laugh at you behind your back and even despise
you, here is the recipe: Never listen to anyone for long. Talk incessantly about yourself. If you have an idea
while the other person is talking, don’t wait for him or her to finish: bust right in and interrupt in the middle of a
sentence.
Do you know people like that? I do, unfortunately; and the astonishing part of it is that some of them
are prominent.
Bores, that is all they are—bores intoxicated with their own egos, drunk with a sense of their own
importance.
People who talk only of themselves think only of themselves. And “those people who think only of
themselves,” Dr. Nicholas Murray Butler, longtime president of Columbia University, said, “are hopelessly
uneducated. They are not educated,” said Dr. Butler, “no matter how instructed they may be.”
So if you aspire to be a good conversationalist, be an attentive listener. To be interesting, be interested.
Ask questions that other persons will enjoy answering. Encourage them to talk about themselves and their
accomplishments.
Remember that the people you are talking to are a hundred times more interested in themselves and
their wants and problems than they are in you and your problems. A person’s toothache means more to that
51
person than a famine in China which kills a million people. A boil on one’s neck interests one more than forty
earthquakes in Africa. Think of that the next time you start a conversation.
PRINCIPLE 4
Be a good listener. Encourage others to talk about themselves.
52
8
“HOW TO INTEREST PEOPLE.”
Everyone who was ever a guest of Theodore Roosevelt was astonished at the range and diversity of his
knowledge. Whether his visitor was a cowboy or a Rough Rider, a New York politician or a diplomat, Roosevelt
knew what to say. And how was it done? The answer was simple. Whenever Roosevelt expected a visitor, he sat
up late the night before, reading up on the subject in which he knew his guest was particularly interested.
For Roosevelt knew, as all leaders know, that the royal road to a person’s heart is to talk about the
things he or she treasures most.
The genial William Lyon Phelps, essayist and professor of literature at Yale, learned this lesson early in
life.
“When I was eight years old and was spending a weekend visiting my Aunt Libby Linsley at her home
in Stratford on the Housatonic,” he wrote in his essay on Human Nature, “a middle-aged man called one
evening, and after a polite skirmish with my aunt, he devoted his attention to me. At that time, I happened to be
excited about boats, and the visitor discussed the subject in a way that seemed to me particularly interesting.
After he left, I spoke of him with enthusiasm. What a man! My aunt informed me he was a New York lawyer,
that he cared nothing whatever about boats—that he took not the slightest interest in the subject. ‘But why then
did he talk all the time about boats?’
“‘Because he is a gentleman. He saw you were interested in boats, and he talked about the things he
knew would interest and please you. He made himself agreeable.’”
And William Lyon Phelps added, “I never forgot my aunt’s remark.”
As I write this chapter, I have before me a letter from Edward L. Chalif, who was active in Boy Scout
work.
“One day I found I needed a favor,” wrote Mr. Chalif. “A big Scout jamboree was coming off in
Europe, and I wanted the president of one of the largest corporations in America to pay the expenses of one of
my boys for the trip.
“Fortunately, just before I went to see this man, I heard that he had drawn a check for a million dollars,
and that after it was canceled, he had had it framed.
“So the first thing I did when I entered his office was to ask to see the check. A check for a million
dollars! I told him I never knew that anybody had ever written such a check, and that I wanted to tell my boys
that I had actually seen a check for a million dollars. He gladly showed it to me; I admired it and asked him to
tell me all about how it happened to be drawn.”
You notice, don’t you, that Mr. Chalif didn’t begin by talking about the Boy Scouts, or the jamboree in
Europe, or what it was he wanted? He talked in terms of what interested the other man. Here’s the result:
“Presently, the man I was interviewing said, ‘Oh, by the way, what was it you wanted to see me
about?’ So I told him.
“To my vast surprise,” Mr. Chalif continues, “he not only granted immediately what I asked for, but
much more. I had asked him to send only one boy to Europe, but he sent five boys and myself, gave me a letter
of credit for a thousand dollars and told us to stay in Europe for seven weeks. He also gave me letters of
introduction to his branch presidents, putting them at our service, and he himself met us in Paris and showed us
the town.
53
Since then, he has given jobs to some of the boys whose parents were in want, and he is still active in
our group.
“Yet I know if I hadn’t found out what he was interested in, and got him warmed up first, I wouldn’t
have found him one-tenth as easy to approach.”
Is this a valuable technique to use in business? Is it? Let’s see, Take Henry G. Duvernoy of Duvemoy
and Sons, a wholesale baking firm in New York.
Mr. Duvernoy had been trying to sell bread to a certain New York hotel. He had called on the manager
every week for four years. He went to the same social affairs the manager attended. He even took rooms in the
hotel and lived there in order to get the business. But he failed.
“Then,” said Mr. Duvernoy, “after studying human relations, I resolved to change my tactics. I decided
to find out what interested this man—what caught his enthusiasm.
“I discovered he belonged to a society of hotel executives called the Hotel Greeters of America. He not
only belonged, but his bubbling enthusiasm had made him president of the organization, and president of the
International Greeters. No matter where its conventions were held, he would be there.
“So when I saw him the next day, I began talking about the Greeters. What a response I got. What a
response! He talked to me for half an hour about the Greeters, his tones vibrant with enthusiasm. I could plainly
see that this society was not only his hobby; it was the passion of his life. Before I left his office, he had ‘sold’
me a membership in his organization.
“In the meantime, I had said nothing about bread. But a few days later, the steward of his hotel phoned
me to come over with samples and prices.
“‘I don’t know what you did to the old boy,’ the steward greeted me, ‘but he sure is sold on you!’
“Think of it! I had been drumming at that man for four years—trying to get his business—and I’d still
be drumming at him if I hadn’t finally taken the trouble to find out what he was interested in, and what he
enjoyed talking about.”
Edward E. Harriman of Hagerstown, Maryland, chose to live in the beautiful Cumberland Valley of
Maryland after he completed his military service. Unfortunately, at that time there were few jobs available in the
area. A little research uncovered the fact that a number of companies in the area were either owned or controlled
by an unusual business maverick, R. J. Funkhouser, whose rise from poverty to riches intrigued Mr. Harriman.
However, he was known for being inaccessible to job seekers. Mr. Harriman wrote:
“I interviewed a number of people and found that his major interest was anchored in his drive for
power and money. Since he protected himself from people like me by use of a dedicated and stern secretary, I
studied her interests and goals and only then I paid an unannounced visit at her office. She had been Mr.
Funkhouser’s orbiting satellite for about fifteen years. When I told her I had a proposition for him which might
translate itself into financial and political success for him, she became enthused. I also conversed with her about
her constructive participation in his success. After this conversation she arranged for me to meet Mr.
Funkhouser.
“I entered his huge and impressive office determined not to ask directly for a job. He was seated behind
a large carved desk and thundered at me, ‘How about it, young man?’ I said, ‘Mr. Funkhouser, I believe I can
make money for you.’ He immediately rose and invited me to sit in one of the large upholstered chairs. I
enumerated my ideas and the qualifications I had to realize these ideas, as well as how they would contribute to
his personal success and that of his businesses.
“‘R. J.’, as he became known to me, hired me at once and for over twenty years I have grown in his
enterprises and we both have prospered.”
Talking in terms of the other person’s interests pays off for both parties. Howard Z. Herzig, a leader in
the field of employee communications, has always followed this principle. When asked what reward he got from
54
it, Mr. Herzig responded that he not only received a different reward from each person but that in general the
reward had been an enlargement of his life each time he spoke to someone.
PRINCIPLE 5
Talk in terms of the other person’s interests.
55
9
“HOW TO MAKE PEOPLE LIKE YOU INSTANTLY.”
I was waiting in line to register a letter in the post office at Thirty-third Street and Eighth Avenue in
New York. I noticed that the clerk appeared to be bored with the job—weighing envelopes, handing out stamps,
making change, issuing receipts—the same monotonous grind year after year. So I said to myself, “I am going
to try to make that clerk like me. Obviously, to make him like me, I must say something nice, not about myself,
but about him. So I asked myself, ‘What is there about him that I can honestly admire?’” That is sometimes a
hard question to answer, especially with strangers; but, in this case, it happened to be easy. I instantly saw
something I admired no end.
So while he was weighing my envelope, I remarked with enthusiasm, “I certainly wish I had your head
of hair.”
He looked up, half-startled, his face beaming with smiles. “Well, it isn’t as good as it used to be,” he
said modestly. I assured him that although it might have lost some of its pristine glory, nevertheless it was still
magnificent. He was immensely pleased. We carried on a pleasant little conversation and the last thing he said
to me was: “Many people have admired my hair.”
I’ll bet that person went out to lunch that day walking on air. I’ll bet he went home that night and told
his wife about it. I’ll bet he looked in the mirror and said, “It is a beautiful head of hair.”
I told this story once in public and a man asked me afterwards, “What did you want to get out of him?”
What was I trying to get out of him!!! What was I trying to get out of him!!!
If we are so contemptibly selfish that we can’t radiate a little happiness and pass on a bit of honest
appreciation without trying to get something out of the other person in return—if our souls are no bigger than
sour crab apples, we shall meet with the failure we so richly deserve. Oh yes, I did want something out of that
chap. I wanted something priceless. And I got it. I got the feeling that I had done something for him without his
being able to do anything whatever in return for me. That is a feeling that flows and sings in your memory lung
after the incident is past.
There is one all-important law of human conduct. If we obey that law, we shall almost never get into
trouble. In fact, that law, if obeyed, will bring us countless friends and constant happiness. But the very instant
we break the law, we shall get into endless trouble. The law is this: Always make the other person feel
important. John Dewey, as we have already noted, said that the desire to be important is the deepest urge in
human nature; and William James said, “The deepest principle in human nature is the craving to be
appreciated.” As I have already pointed out, it is this urge that differentiates us from the animals. It is this urge
that has been responsible for civilization itself.
Philosophers have been speculating on the rules of human relationships for thousands of years, and out
of all that speculation, there has evolved only one important precept. It is not new. It is as old as history.
Zoroaster taught it to his followers in Persia twenty-five hundred years ago. Confucius preached it in China
twenty-four centuries ago. Lao-tse, the founder of Taoism, taught it to his disciples in the Valley of the Han.
Buddha preached it on the bank of the Holy Ganges five hundred years before Christ. The sacred books of
Hinduism taught it a thousand years before that. Jesus taught it among the stony hills of Judea nineteen centuries
ago. Jesus summed it up in one thought—probably the most important rule in the world: “Do unto others as you
would have others do unto you.”
You want the approval of those with whom you come in contact. You want recognition of your true
worth. You want a feeling that you are important in your little world. You don’t want to listen to cheap,
insincere flattery, but you do crave sincere appreciation. You want your friends and associates to be, as Charles
Schwab put it, “hearty in their approbation and lavish in their praise.” All of us want that.
56
So let’s obey the Golden Rule, and give unto others what we would have others give unto us, How?
When? Where? The answer is: All the time, everywhere.
David G. Smith of Eau Claire, Wisconsin, told one of our classes how he handled a delicate situation
when he was asked to take charge of the refreshment booth at a charity concert, “The night of the concert I
arrived at the park and found two elderly ladies in a very bad humor standing next to the refreshment stand.
Apparently each thought that she was in charge of this project. As I stood there pondering what to do, me of the
members of the sponsoring committee appeared and handed me a cashbox and thanked me for taking over the
project. She introduced Rose and Jane as my helpers and then ran off.
“A great silence ensued. Realizing that the cash box was a symbol of authority (of sorts), I gave the box
to Rose and explained that I might not be able to keep the money straight and that if she took care of it I would
feel better. I then suggested to Jane that she show two teenagers who had been assigned to refreshments how to
operate the soda machine, and I asked her to be responsible for that part of the project.
“The evening was very enjoyable with Rose happily counting the money, Jane supervising the
teenagers, and me enjoying the concert.”
You don’t have to wait until you are ambassador to France or chairman of the Clambake Committee of
your lodge before you use this philosophy of appreciation. You can work magic with it almost every day.
If, for example, the waitress brings us mashed potatoes when we have ordered French fries, let’s say,
“I’m sorry to trouble you, but I prefer French fries.” She’ll probably reply, “No trouble at all” and will be glad
to change the potatoes, because we have shown respect for her.
Little phrases such as “I’m sorry to trouble you,” “Would you be so kind as to…?” “Won't you
please?” “Would you mind?” “Thank you”—little courtesies like these oil the cogs of the monotonous grind of
everyday life—and, incidentally, they are the hallmark of good breeding.
Let’s take another illustration. Hall Caine’s novels—The Christian, The Deemster, The Manxman,
among them—were all best-sellers in the early part of this century. Millions of people read his novels, countless
millions. He was the son of a blacksmith. He never had more than eight years’ schooling in his life; yet when he
died he was the richest literary man of his time.
The story goes like this: Hall Caine loved sonnets and ballads; so he devoured all of Dante Gabriel
Rossetti’s poetry. He even wrote a lecture chanting the praises of Rossetti’s artistic achievement and sent a copy
to Rossetti himself. Rossetti was delighted. “Any young man who has such an exalted opinion of my ability,”
Rossetti probably said to himself, “must be brilliant,” So Rossetti invited this blacksmith’s son to come to
London and act as his secretary. That was the turning point in Hall Caine’s life; for, in his new position, he met
the literary artists of the day. Profiting by their advice and inspired by their encouragement, he launched upon a
career that emblazoned his name across the sky.
His home, Greeba Castle, on the Isle of Man, became a Mecca for tourists from the far corners of the
world, and he left a multimillion-dollar estate. Yet—who knows—he might have died poor and unknown had he
not written an essay expressing his admiration for a famous man.
Such is the power, the stupendous power, of sincere, heartfelt appreciation.
Rossetti considered himself important. That is not strange, Almost everyone considers himself
important, very important.
The life of many a person could probably be changed if only someone would make him feel important.
Ronald J. Rowland, who is one of the instructors of our course in California, is also a teacher of arts and crafts.
He wrote to us about a student named Chris in his beginning crafts class:
“Chris was a very quiet, shy boy lacking in self-confidence, the kind of student that often does not
receive the attention he deserves. I also teach an advanced class that had grown to be somewhat of a status
symbol and a privilege for a student to have earned the right to be in it. On Wednesday, Chris was diligently
working at his desk. I really felt there was a hidden fire deep inside him. I asked Chris if he would like to be in
57
the advanced class. How I wish I could express the look in Chris’s face, the emotions in that shy fourteen-yearold boy, trying to hold back his tears.”
“Who me, Mr. Rowland? Am I good enough?”
“Yes, Chris, you are good enough.”
I had to leave at that point because tears were coming to my eyes. As Chris walked out of class that
day, seemingly two inches taller, he looked at me with bright blue eyes and said in a positive voice, “Thank you,
Mr. Rowland.”
Chris taught me a lesson I will never forget—our deep desire to feel important. To help me never forget
this rule, I made a sign which reads “YOU ARE IMPORTANT." This sign hangs in the front of the classroom
for all to see and to remind me that each student I face is equally important.
The unvarnished truth is that almost all the people you meet feel themselves superior to you in some
way, and a sure way to their hearts is to let them realize in some subtle way that you recognize their importance,
and recognize it sincerely.
Remember what Emerson said, “Every man I meet is my superior in some way. In that, I learn of him.”
And the pathetic part of it is that frequently those who have the least justification for a feeling of
achievement bolster up their egos by a show of tumult and conceit which is truly nauseating. As Shakespeare
put it, “…man, proud man,/Dress in a little brief authority,/…Plays such fantastic tricks before high heaven/As
make the angels weep.”
I am going to tell you how business people in my own courses have applied these principles with
remarkable results. Let’s take the case of a Connecticut attorney (because of his relatives he prefers not to have
his name mentioned).
Shortly after joining the course, Mr. R----- drove to Long Island with his wife to visit some of her
relatives. She left him to chat with an old aunt of hers and they rushed off by herself to visit some of the younger
relatives. Since he soon had to give a speech professionally on how he applied the principles of appreciation, he
thought he would gain some worthwhile experience talking with the elderly lady. So he looked around the house
to see what he could honestly admire.
“This house was built about 1890, wasn’t it?” he inquired.
“Yes,” she replied, “that is precisely the year it was built.”
“It reminds me of the house I was born in,” he said. “It’s beautiful. Well built. Roomy. You know, they
don’t build houses like this anymore.”
“You’re right,” the old lady agreed. “The young folks nowadays don’t care for beautiful homes. All
they want is a small apartment, and then they go off gadding about in their automobiles.
“This is a dream house,” she said in a voice vibrating with tender memories. “This house was built with
love. My husband and I dreamed about it for years before we built it. We didn’t have an architect. We planned it
all ourselves.”
She showed Mr. R----- about the house, and he expressed his hearty admiration for the beautiful
treasures she had picked up in her travels and cherished over a lifetime—paisley shawls, an old English tea set,
Wedgwood china, French beds and chairs, Italian paintings, and silk draperies that had once hung in a French
chateau.
After showing Mr. R----- through the house, she took him out to the garage. There, jacked up on
blocks, was a Packard car—in mint condition.
“My husband bought that car for me shortly before he passed on,” she said softly. “I have never ridden
in it since his death…You appreciate nice things, and I’m going to give this car to you.”
58
“Why, aunty,” he said, “you overwhelm me. I appreciate your generosity, of course; but I couldn’t
possibly accept it. I’m not even a relative of yours. I have a new car, and you have many relatives that would
like to have that Packard.”
“Relatives!” she exclaimed. “Yes, I have relatives who are just waiting till I die so they can get that car.
But they are not going to get it.”
“If you don’t want to give it to them, you can very easily sell it to a secondhand dealer,” he told her.
“Sell it!” she cried. “Do you think I would sell this car? Do you think I could stand to see strangers
riding up and down the street in that car—that car that my husband bought for me? I wouldn’t dream of selling
it. I’m going to give it to you. You appreciate beautiful things."
He tried to get out of accepting the car, but he couldn’t without hurting her feelings.
This lady, left all alone in a big house with her paisley shawls, her French antiques, and her memories,
was starving for a little recognition, She had once been young and beautiful and sought after. She had once built
a house warm with love and had collected things from all over Europe to make it beautiful. Now, in the isolated
loneliness of old age, she craved a little human warmth, a little genuine appreciation—and no one gave it to her.
And when she found it, like a spring in the desert, her gratitude couldn’t adequately express itself with anything
less than the gift of her cherished Packard.
Let’s take another case: Donald M. McMahon, who was superintendent of Lewis and Valentine,
nurserymen and landscape architects in Rye, New York, related this incident:
“Shortly after I attended the talk on ‘How to Win Friends and Influence People,’ I was landscaping the
estate of a famous attorney. The owner came out to give me a few instructions about where he wished to plant a
mass of rhododendrons and azaleas.
“I said, ‘Judge, you have a lovely hobby. I’ve been admiring your beautiful dogs. I understand you win
a lot of blue ribbons every year at the show in Madison Square Garden.’
“The effect of this little expression of appreciation was striking.
“‘Yes,’ the judge replied, ‘I do have a lot of fun with my dogs. Would you like to see my kennel?’
“He spent almost an hour showing me his dogs and the prizes they had won. He even brought out their
pedigrees and explained about the bloodlines responsible for such beauty and intelligence.
“Finally, turning to me, he asked, ‘Do you have any small children?’
“‘Yes, I do,’ I replied, ‘I have a son.’
“‘Well, wouldn’t he like a puppy?’ the judge inquired.
“‘Oh, yes, he’d be tickled pink.’
“‘All right, I’m going to give him one,’ the judge announced.
“He started to tell me how to feed the puppy. Then he paused. ‘You’ll forget it if I tell you. I’ll write it
out.’ So the judge went in the house, typed out the pedigree and feeding instructions, and gave me a puppy
worth several hundred dollars and one hour and fifteen minutes of his valuable time largely because I had
expressed my honest admiration for his hobby and achievements.”
George Eastman, of Kodak fame, invented the transparent film that made motion pictures possible,
amassed a fortune of a hundred million dollars, and made himself one of the most famous businessmen on earth.
Yet in spite of all these tremendous accomplishments, he craved little recognitions even as you and I.
To illustrate: When Eastman was building the Eastman School of Music and also Kilbourn Hall in
Rochester, James Adamson, then president of the Superior Seating Company of New York, wanted to get the
59
order to supply the theater chairs for these buildings. Phoning the architect, Mr. Adamson made an appointment
to see Mr. Eastman in Rochester.
When Adamson arrived, the architect said, “I know you want to get this order, but I can tell you right
now that you won’t stand a ghost of a show if you take more than five minutes of George Eastman’s time. He is
a strict disciplinarian. He is very busy. So tell your story quickly and get out.”
Adamson was prepared to do just that.
When he was ushered into the room he saw Mr. Eastman bending over a pile of papers at his desk.
Presently, Mr. Eastman looked up, removed his glasses, and walked toward the architect and Mr. Adamson,
saying, “Good morning, gentlemen, what can I do for you?”
The architect introduced them, and then Mr. Adamson said, “While we’ve been waiting for you, Mr.
Eastman, I’ve been admiring your office. I wouldn’t mind working in a room like this myself. I’m in the
interior-woodworking business, and I never saw a more beautiful office in all my life.”
George Eastman replied, “You remind me of something I had almost forgotten. It is beautiful, isn’t it? I
enjoyed it a great deal when it was first built. But I come down here now with a lot of other things on my mind
and sometimes don’t even see the room for weeks at a time.”
Adamson walked over and rubbed his hand across a panel. “This is English oak, isn’t it? A little
different texture from Italian oak.”
“Yes,” Eastman replied. “Imported English oak. It was selected for me by a friend who specializes in
fine woods.”
Then Eastman showed him about the room, commenting on the proportions, the coloring, the hand
carving and other effects he had helped to plan and execute.
While drifting about the room, admiring the woodwork, they paused before a window, and George
Eastman, in his modest, soft-spoken way, pointed out some of the institutions through which he was trying to
help humanity: the University of Rochester, the General Hospital, the Homeopathic Hospital, the Friendly
Home, the Children’s Hospital. Mr. Adamson congratulated him warmly on the idealistic way he was using his
wealth to alleviate the sufferings of humanity. Presently, George Eastman unlocked a glass case and pulled out
the first camera he had ever owned—an invention he had bought from an Englishman.
Adamson questioned him at length about his early struggles to get started in business, and Mr. Eastman
spoke with real feeling about the poverty of his childhood, telling how his widowed mother had kept a
boardinghouse while he clerked in an insurance office. The terror of poverty haunted him day and night, and he
resolved to make enough money so that his mother wouldn’t have to work, Mr. Adamson drew him out with
further questions and listened, absorbed, while he related the story of his experiments with dry photographic
plates. He told how he had worked in an office all day, and sometimes experimented all night, taking only brief
naps while the chemicals were working, sometimes working and sleeping in his clothes for seventy-two hours at
a stretch.
James Adamson had been ushered into Eastman’s office at ten-fifteen and had been warned that he
must not take more than five minutes; but an hour had passed, then two hours passed. And they were still
talking. Finally, George Eastman turned to Adamson and said, “The last time I was in Japan I bought some
chairs, brought them home, and put them in my sun porch. But the sun peeled the paint, so I went downtown the
other day and bought some paint and painted the chairs myself. Would you like to see what sort of a job I can do
painting chairs? All right. Come up to my home and have lunch with me and I’ll show you.”
After lunch, Mr. Eastman showed Adamson the chairs he had brought from Japan. They weren’t worth
more than a few dollars, but George Eastman, now a multimillionaire, was proud of them because he himself
had painted them.
The order for the seats amounted to $90,000. Who do you suppose got the order—James Adamson or
one of his competitors?
60
From the time of this story until Mr. Eastman’s death, he and James Adamson were close friends.
Claude Marais, a restaurant owner in Rouen, France, used this principle and saved his restaurant the
loss of a key employee. This woman had been in his employ for five years and was a vital link between M.
Marais and his staff of twenty-one people. He was shocked to receive a registered letter from her advising him
of her resignation.
M. Marais reported, “I was very surprised and, even more, disappointed, because I was under the
impression that I had been fair to her and receptive to her needs. Inasmuch as she was a friend as well as an
employee, I probably had taken her too much for granted and maybe was even more demanding of her than of
other employees.
“I could not, of course, accept this resignation without some explanation. I took her aside and said,
‘Paulette, you must understand that I cannot accept your resignation. You mean a great deal to me and to this
company, and you are as important to the success of this restaurant as I am.’ I repeated this in front of the entire
staff, and I invited her to my home and reiterated my confidence in her with my family present.
“Paulette withdrew her resignation, and today I can rely on her as never before. I frequently reinforce
this by expressing my appreciation for what she does and showing her how important she is to me and to the
restaurant.”
“Talk to people about themselves,” said Disraeli, one of the shrewdest men who ever ruled the British
Empire. “Talk to people about themselves and they will listen for hours.”
PRINCIPLE 6
Make the other person feel important—and do it sincerely.
In a Nutshell
SIX WAYS TO MAKE PEOPLE LIKE YOU
PRINCIPLE 1
Become genuinely interested in other people.
PRINCIPLE 2
Smile.
PRINCIPLE 3
Remember that a person’s name is to that person the sweetest and most important sound in any language.
PRINCIPLE 4
Be a good listener. Encourage others to talk about themselves.
PRINCIPLE 5
Talk in terms of the other person’s interests.
PRINCIPLE 6
Make the other person feel important—and do it sincerely.
61
PART THREE
How To Win People To Your Way Of Thinking
62
10
“YOU CAN’T WIN AN ARGUMENT.”
Shortly after the close of World War I, I learned an invaluable lesson one night in London. I was
manager at the time for Sir Ross Smith. During the war, Sir Ross had been the Australian ace out in Palestine;
and shortly after peace was declared, he astonished the world by flying halfway around it in thirty days. No such
feat had ever been attempted before. It created a tremendous sensation. The Australian government awarded him
fifty thousand dollars; the King of England knighted him; and, for a while, he was the most talked-about man
under the Union Jack. I was attending a banquet one night given in Sir Ross’s honor; and during the dinner, the
man sitting next to me told a humorous story which hinged on the quotation “There’s a divinity that shapes our
ends, rough-hew them how we will.”
The raconteur mentioned that the quotation was from the Bible. He was wrong. I knew that, I knew it
positively. There couldn’t be the slightest doubt about it. And so, to get a feeling of importance and display my
superiority, I appointed myself as an unsolicited and unwelcome committee of one to correct him. He stuck to
his guns. What? From Shakespeare? Impossible! Absurd! That quotation was from the Bible. And he knew it.
The storyteller was sitting on my right; and Frank Gammond, an old friend of mine, was seated at my
left. Mr. Gammond had devoted years to the study of Shakespeare, So the storyteller and I agreed to submit the
question to Mr. Gammond. Mr. Gammond listened, kicked me under the table, and then said: “Dale, you are
wrong. The gentleman is right. It is from the Bible.”
On our way home that night, I said to Mr. Gammond, “Frank, you knew that quotation was from
Shakespeare,”
“Yes, of course,” he replied, “Hamlet, Act Five, Scene Two. But we were guests at a festive occasion,
my dear Dale. Why prove to a man he is wrong? Is that going to make him like you? Why not let him save his
face? He didn’t ask for your opinion. He didn’t want it. Why argue with him? Always avoid the acute angle.”
The man who said that taught me a lesson I’ll never forget. I not only had made the storyteller uncomfortable,
but had put my friend in an embarrassing situation. How much better it would have been had I not become
argumentative.
It was a sorely needed lesson because I had been an inveterate arguer. During my youth, I had argued
with my brother about everything under the Milky Way. When I went to college, I studied logic and
argumentation and went in for debating contests. Talk about being from Missouri, I was born there. I had to be
shown. Later, I taught debating and argumentation in New York; and once, I am ashamed to admit, I planned to
write a book on the subject. Since then, I have listened to, engaged in, and watched the effect of thousands of
arguments. As a result of all this, I have come to the conclusion that there is only one way under high heaven to
get the best of an argument—and that is to avoid it.
Avoid it as you would avoid rattlesnakes and earthquakes.
Nine times out of ten, an argument ends with each of the contestants more firmly convinced than ever
that he is absolutely right.
You can’t win an argument. You can’t because if you lose it, you lose it; and if you win it, you lose it.
Why? Well, suppose you triumph over the other man and shoot his argument full of holes and prove that he is
non compos mentis. Then what? You will feel fine. But what about him? You have made him feel inferior. You
have hurt his pride. He will resent your triumph. And…
A man convinced against his will is of the same opinion still.
Years ago Patrick J. O’Haire joined one of my classes. He had had little education, and how he loved a
scrap! He had once been a chauffeur, and he came to me because he had been trying, without much success, to
sell trucks. A little questioning brought out the fact that he was continually scrapping with and antagonizing the
63
very people he was trying to do business with. If a prospect said anything derogatory about the trucks he was
selling, Pat saw red and was right at the customer’s throat. Pat won a lot of arguments in those days. As he said
to me afterward, “I often walked out of an office saying, ‘I told that bird something.’ Sure I had told him
something, but I hadn’t sold him anything.”
Mv first problem was not to teach Patrick J. O’Haire to talk. My immediate task was to train him to
refrain from talking and to avoid verbal fights.
Mr. O’Haire became one of the star salesmen for the White Motor Company in New York. How did he
do it? Here is his story in his own words: “If I walk into a buyer’s office now and he says, ‘What? A White
truck? They’re no good! I wouldn’t take one if you gave it to me. I’m going to buy the Whose-It truck,’ I say,
‘The Whose-It is a good truck. If you buy the Whose-It, you’ll never make a mistake. The Whose-Its are made
by a fine company and sold by good people.’
“He is speechless then. There is no room for an argument. If he says the Whose-It is best and I say sure
it is, he has to stop. He can’t keep on all afternoon saying, ‘It’s the best’ when I’m agreeing with him. We then
get off the subject of Whose-It and I begin to talk about the good points of the White truck.
“There was a time when a remark like his first one would have made me see scarlet and red and orange.
I would start arguing against the Whose-It; and the more I argued against it, the more my prospect argued in
favor of it; and the more he argued, the more he sold himself on my competitor’s product.
“As I look back now I wonder how I was ever able to sell anything. I lost years of my life in scrapping
and arguing. I keep my mouth shut now. It pays.”
As wise old Ben Franklin used to say: If you argue and rankle and contradict, you may achieve a
victory sometimes; but it will be an empty victory because you will never get your opponent’s goodwill.
So figure it out for yourself. Which would you rather have, an academic, theatrical victory or a person’s
good will? You can seldom have both.
The Boston Transcript once printed this bit of significant doggerel:
Here lies the body of William Jay, .
Who died maintaining his right of way—
He was right, dead right, as he sped along,
But he’s just as dead as if he were wrong.
You may be right, dead right, as you speed along in your argument; but as far as changing another’s
mind is concerned, you will probably be just as futile as if you were wrong.
Frederick S. Parsons, an income tax consultant, had been disputing and wrangling for an hour with a
government tax inspector. An item of nine thousand dollars was at stake. Mr. Parsons claimed that this nine
thousand dollars was in reality a bad debt, that it would never be collected, that it ought not to be taxed. “Bad
debt, my eye!” retorted the inspector. “It must be taxed.”
“This inspector was cold, arrogant and stubborn,” Mr. Parsons said as he told the story to the class.
“Reason was wasted and so were facts…The longer we argued, the more stubborn he became. So I decided to
avoid argument, change the subject, and give him appreciation.
“I said, ‘I suppose this is a very petty matter in comparison with the really important and difficult
decisions you’re required to make. I’ve made a study of taxation myself. But I’ve had to get my knowledge from
books. You are getting yours from the firing line of experience. I sometime wish I had a job like yours. It would
teach me a lot.’ I meant every word I said.
“Well.” The inspector straightened up in his chair, leaned back, and talked for a long time about his
work, telling me of the clever frauds he had uncovered. His tone gradually became friendly, and presently he
was telling me about his children. As he left, he advised me that he would consider my problem further and give
me his decision in a few days.
64
“He called at my office three days later and informed me that he had decided to leave the tax return
exactly as it was filed.”
This tax inspector was demonstrating one of the most common of human frailties. He wanted a feeling
of importance; and as long as Mr. Parsons argued with him, he got his feeling of importance by loudly asserting
his authority. But as soon as his importance was admitted and the argument stopped and he was permitted to
expand his ego, he became a sympathetic and kindly human being.
Buddha said, “Hatred is never ended by hatred but by love,” and a misunderstanding is never ended by
an argument but by tact, diplomacy, conciliation and a sympathetic desire to see the other person’s viewpoint.
Lincoln once reprimanded a young army officer for indulging in a violent controversy with an
associate. “No man who is resolved to make the most of himself,” said Lincoln, “can spare time for personal
contention. Still less can he afford to take the consequences, including the vitiation of his temper and the loss of
self-control. Yield larger things to which you show no more than equal rights; and yield lesser ones though
clearly your own. Better give your path to a dog than be bitten by him in contesting for the right. Even killing
the dog would not cure the bite.”
In an article in Bits and Pieces*, some suggestions are made on how to keep a disagreement from
becoming an argument:
Welcome the disagreement. Remember the slogan, “When two partners always agree, one of them is
not necessary.” If there is some point you haven’t thought about, be thankful if it is brought to your attention.
Perhaps this disagreement is your opportunity to be corrected before you make a serious mistake.
Distrust your first instinctive impression. Our first natural reaction in a disagreeable situation is to be
defensive. Be careful. Keep calm and watch out for your first reaction. It may be you at your worst, not your
best.
Control your temper. Remember, you can measure the size of a person by what makes him or her
angry.
Listen first. Give your opponents a chance to talk. Let them finish. Do not resist, defend or debate. This
only raises barriers. Try to build bridges of understanding. Don’t build higher barriers of misunderstanding.
Look for areas of agreement. When you have heard your opponents out, dwell first on the points and
areas on which you agree.
Be honest, Look for areas where you can admit error and say so. Apologize for your mistakes. It will
help disarm your opponents and reduce defensiveness.
Promise to think over your opponents’ ideas and study them carefully. And mean it. Your opponents
may be right. It is a lot easier at this stage to agree to think about their points than to move rapidly ahead and
find yourself in a position where your opponents can say, “We tried to tell you, but you wouldn’t listen.”
Thank your opponents sincerely for their interest. Anyone who takes the time to disagree with you is
interested in the same things you are. Think of them as people who really want to help you, and you may turn
your opponents into friends.
Postpone action to give both sides time to think through the problem. Suggest that a new meeting be
held later that day or the next day, when all the facts may be brought to bear. In preparation for this meeting, ask
yourself some hard questions:
Could my opponents be right? Partly right? Is there truth or merit in their position or argument? Is my
reaction one that will relieve the problem, or will it just relieve any frustration? Will my reaction drive my
opponents further away or draw them closer to me? Will my reaction elevate the estimation good people have of
me? Will I win or lose? What price will I have to pay if I win? If I am quiet about it, will the disagreement blow
over? Is this difficult situation an opportunity for me?
* Bits and Pieces, published by The Economics Press, Fairfield, N.J.
65
Opera tenor Jan Peerce, after he was married nearly fifty years, once said, “My wife and I made a pact
a long time ago, and we’ve kept it no matter how angry we’ve grown with each other. When one yells, the other
should listen, because when two people yell, there is no communication, just noise and bad vibrations.”
PRINCIPLE 1
The only way to get the best of an argument is to avoid it.
66
11
“A SURE WAY OF MAKING ENEMIES—AND HOW TO
AVOID IT.”
When Theodore Roosevelt was in the White House, he confessed that if he could be right 75 percent of
the time, he would reach the highest measure of his expectation.
If that was the highest rating that one of the most distinguished men of the twentieth century could
hope to obtain, what about you and me?
If you can be sure of being right only 55 percent of the time, you can go down to Wall Street and make
a million dollars a day. If you can’t be sure of being right even 55 percent of the time, why should you tell other
people they are wrong?
You can tell people they are wrong by a look or an intonation or a gesture just as eloquently as you can
in words—and if you tell them they are wrong, do you make them want to agree with you? Never! For you have
struck a direct blow at their intelligence, judgment, pride and self-respect. That will make them want to strike
back. But it will never make them want to change their minds. You may then hurl at them all the logic of a Plato
or an Immanuel Kant, but you will not alter their opinions, for you have hurt their feelings.
Never begin by announcing “I am going to prove so-and-so to you.” That’s bad. That’s tantamount to
saying, “I’m smarter than you are, I’m going to tell you a thing or two and make you change your mind.”
That is a challenge. It arouses opposition and makes the listener want to battle with you before you
even start.
It is difficult, under even the most benign conditions, to change people’s minds. So why make it
harder? Why handicap yourself?
If you are going to prove anything, don’t let anybody know it. Do it so subtly, so adroitly, that no one
will feel that you are doing it. This was expressed succinctly by Alexander Pope: Men must be taught as if you
taught them not, and things unknown proposed as things forgot.
Over three hundred years ago Galileo said, “You cannot teach a man anything; you can only help him
to find it within himself.”
As Lord Chesterfield said to his son, “Be wiser than other people if you can, but do not tell them so.”
Socrates said repeatedly to his followers in Athens, “One thing only I know, and that is that I know
nothing.”
Well, I can’t hope to be any smarter than Socrates, so I have quit telling people they are wrong. And I
find that it pays.
If a person makes a statement that you think is wrong—yes, even that you know is wrong—isn’t it
better to begin by saying, “Well, now, look, I thought otherwise, but I may be wrong. I frequently am. And if I
am wrong, I want to be put right. Let’s examine the facts.”
There’s magic, positive magic, in such phrases as, “I may be wrong. I frequently am. Let’s examine the
facts.”
Nobody in the heavens above or on earth beneath or in the waters under the earth will ever object to
your saying, “I may be wrong. Let’s examine the facts.”
67
One of our class members who used this approach in dealing with customers was Harold Reinke, a
Dodge dealer in Billings, Montana. He reported that because of the pressures of the automobile business, he was
often hard-boiled and callous when dealing with customers’ complaints. This caused flared tempers, loss of
business and general unpleasantness.
He told his class, “Recognizing that this was getting me nowhere fast, I tried a new tack. I would say
something like this, ‘Our dealership has made so many mistakes that I am frequently ashamed. We may have
erred in your case. Tell me about it.’
“This approach becomes quite disarming, and by the time the customer releases his feelings, he is
usually much more reasonable when it comes to settling the matter. In fact, several customers have thanked me
for having such an understanding attitude. And two of them have even brought in friends to buy new cars. In
this highly competitive market, we need more of this type of customer, and I believe that showing respect for all
customers’ opinions and treating them diplomatically and courteously will help beat the competition.”
You will never get into trouble by admitting that you may be wrong. That will stop all argument and
inspire your opponent to be just as fair and open and broad-minded as you are. It will make him want to admit
that he, too, may be wrong.
If you know positively that a person is wrong, and you bluntly tell him or her so, what happens? Let me
illustrate. Mr. S---- a young New York attorney, once argued a rather important case before the United States
Supreme Court (Lustgarten v. Fleet Corporation 280 U.S. 320). The case involved a considerable sum of money
and an important question of law. During the argument, one of the Supreme Court justices said to him, “The
statute of limitations in admiralty law is six years, is it not?”
Mr. S---- stopped, stared at the Justice for a moment, and then said bluntly, “Your Honor, there is no
statute of limitations in admiralty.”
“A hush fell on the court,” said Mr. S---- as he related his experience to one of the author’s classes,
“and the temperature in the room seemed to drop to zero. I was right. Justice—was wrong. And I had told him
so. But did that make him friendly? No. I still believe that I had the law on my side. And I know that I spoke
better than I ever spoke before. But I didn’t persuade. I made the enormous blunder of telling a very learned and
famous man that he was wrong.”
Few people are logical. Most of us are prejudiced and biased. Most of us are blighted with
preconceived notions, with jealousy, suspicion, fear, envy and pride. And most citizens don’t want to change
their minds about their religion or their haircut or communism or their favorite movie star. So, if you are
inclined to tell people they are wrong, please read the following paragraph every morning before breakfast. It is
from James Harvey Robinson’s enlightening book The Mind in the Making.
We sometimes find ourselves changing our minds without any resistance or heavy emotion, but if we
are told we are wrong, we resent the imputation and harden our hearts. We are incredibly heedless in the
formation of our beliefs, but find ourselves filled with an illicit passion for them when anyone proposes to rob
us of their companionship. It is obviously not the ideas themselves that are dear to us, but our self-esteem which
is threatened…The little word ‘my’ is the most important one in human affairs, and properly to reckon with it is
the beginning of wisdom. It has the same force whether it is ‘my’ dinner, ‘my’ dog, and ‘my’ house, or ‘my’
father, ‘my’ country, and ‘my’ God. We not only resent the imputation that our watch is wrong, or our car
shabby, but that our conception of the canals of Mars, of the pronunciation of “Epictetus”, of the medicinal
value of salicin, or of the date of Sargon I is subject to revision. We like to continue to believe what we have
been accustomed to accept as true, and the resentment aroused when doubt is cast upon any of our assumptions
leads us to seek every manner of excuse for clinging to it. The result is that most of our so-called reasoning
consists in finding arguments for going on believing as we already do.
Carl Rogers, the eminent psychologist, wrote in his book On Becoming a Person:
I have found it of enormous value when I can permit myself to understand the other person. The way in
which I have worded this statement may seem strange to you. Is it necessary to permit oneself to understand
another? I think it is. Our first reaction to most of the statements (which we hear from other people) is an
evaluation or judgment, rather than an understanding of it. When someone expresses some feeling, attitude or
belief, our tendency is almost immediately to feel “that’s right,” or “that’s stupid,” “that’s abnormal,” “that’s
68
unreasonable,” “that’s incorrect,” “that’s not nice.” Very rarely do we permit ourselves to understand precisely
what the meaning of the statement is to the other person.*
* Adapted from Carl R. Rogers, On Becoming a Person (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1961), pp. 18ff.
I once employed an interior decorator to make some draperies for my home. When the bill arrived, I
was dismayed.
A few days later, a friend dropped in and looked at the draperies. The price was mentioned, and she
exclaimed with a note of triumph, “What? That’s awful. I am afraid he put one over on you.”
True? Yes, she had told the truth, but few people like to listen to truths that reflect on their judgment.
So, being human, I tried to defend myself. I pointed out that the best is eventually the cheapest, that one can’t
expect to get quality and artistic taste at bargain-basement prices, and so on and on.
The next day another friend dropped in, admired the draperies, bubbled over with enthusiasm, and
expressed a wish that she could afford such exquisite creations for her home. My reaction was totally different.
“Well, to tell the truth,” I said, “I can’t afford them myself. I paid too much. I’m sorry I ordered them,”
When we are wrong, we may admit it to ourselves. And if we are handled gently and tactfully, we may
admit it to others and even take pride in our frankness and broad-mindedness. But not if someone else is trying
to ram the unpalatable fact down our esophagus.
Horace Greeley, the most famous editor in America during the time of the Civil War, disagreed
violently with Lincoln’s policies. He believed that he could drive Lincoln into agreeing with him by a campaign
of argument, ridicule and abuse. He waged this bitter campaign month after month, year after year. In fact, he
wrote a brutal, bitter, sarcastic and personal attack on President Lincoln the night Booth shot him.
But did all this bitterness make Lincoln agree with Greeley? Not at all. Ridicule and abuse never do. If
you want some excellent suggestions about dealing with people and managing yourself and improving your
personality, read Benjamin Franklin’s autobiography—one of the most fascinating life stories ever written, one
of the classics of American literature. Ben Franklin tells how he conquered the iniquitous habit of argument and
transformed himself into one of the most able, suave and diplomatic men in American history.
One day, when Ben Franklin was a blundering youth, an old Quaker friend took him aside and lashed
him with a few stinging truths, something like this:
Ben, you are impossible. Your opinions have a slap in them for everyone who differs with you. They
have become so offensive that nobody cares for them. Your friends find they enjoy themselves better when you
are not around. You know so much that no man can tell you anything. Indeed, no man is going to try, for the
effort would lead only to discomfort and hard work. So you are not likely ever to know any more than you do
now, which is very little.
One of the finest things I know about Ben Franklin is the way he accepted that smarting rebuke. He
was big enough and wise enough to realize that it was true, to sense that he was headed for failure and social
disaster. So he made a right-about-face. He began immediately to change his insolent, opinionated ways.
“I made it a rule,” said Franklin, “to forbear all direct contradiction to the sentiment of others, and all
positive assertion of my own, I even forbade myself the use of every word or expression in the language that
imported a fix’d opinion, such as ‘certainly,’ ‘undoubtedly,’ etc., and I adopted, instead of them, ‘I conceive,’ ‘I
apprehend,’ or ‘I imagine’ a thing to be so or so, or ‘it so appears to me at present.’ When another asserted
something that I thought an error, I deny’d myself the pleasure of contradicting him abruptly, and of showing
immediately some absurdity in his proposition: and in answering I began by observing that in certain cases or
circumstances his opinion would be right, but in the present case there appear’d or seem’d to me some
difference, etc. I soon found the advantage of this change in my manner; the conversations I engag’d in went on
more pleasantly. The modest way in which I propos’d my opinions procur’d them a readier reception and less
contradiction; I had less mortification when I was found to be in the wrong, and I more easily prevaile’d with
others to give up their mistakes and join with me when I happened to be in the right.
69
“And this mode, which I at first put on with some violence to natural inclination, became at length so
easy, and so habitual to me, that perhaps for these fifty years past no one has ever heard a dogmatical expression
escape me. And to this habit (after my character of integrity) I think it principally owing that I had earned so
much weight with my fellow citizens when I proposed new institutions, or alterations in the old, and so much
influence in public councils when I became a member; for I was but a bad speaker, never eloquent, subject to
much hesitation in my choice of words, hardly correct in language, and yet I generally carried my points.”
How do Ben Franklin’s methods work in business? Let’s take two examples.
Katherine A, Allred of Kings Mountain, North Carolina, is an industrial engineering supervisor for a
yarn-processing plant. She told one of our classes how she handled a sensitive problem before and after taking
our training:
“Part of my responsibility,” she reported, “deals with setting up and maintaining incentive systems and
standards for our operators so they can make more money by producing more yarn. The system we were using
had worked fine when we had only two or three different types of yarn, but recently we had expanded our
inventory and capabilities to enable us to run more than twelve different varieties. The present system was no
longer adequate to pay the operators fairly for the work being performed and give them an incentive to increase
production. I had worked up a new system which would enable us to pay the operator by the class of yam she
was running at any one particular time. With my new system in hand, I entered the meeting determined to prove
to the management that my system was the right approach. I told them in detail how they were wrong and
showed where they were being unfair and how I had all the answers they needed. To say the least, I failed
miserably! I had become so busy defending my position on the new system that I had left them no opening to
graciously admit their problems on the old one. The issue was dead.
“After several sessions of this course, I realized all too well where I had made my mistakes. I called
another meeting and this time I asked where they felt their problems were. We discussed each point, and I asked
them their opinions on which was the best way to proceed. With a few low-keyed suggestions, at proper
intervals, I let them develop my system themselves. At the end of the meeting when I actually presented my
system, they enthusiastically accepted it.
“I am convinced now that nothing good is accomplished and a lot of damage can be done if you tell a
person straight out that he or she is wrong. You only succeed in stripping that person of self-dignity and making
yourself an unwelcome part of any discussion.”
Let’s take another example—and remember these cases I am citing are typical of the experiences of
thousands of other people. R. V. Crowley was a salesman for a lumber company in New York. Crowley
admitted that he had been telling hard-boiled lumber inspectors for years that they were wrong. And he had won
the arguments too. But it hadn’t done any good. “For these lumber inspectors,” said Mr. Crowley, "are like
baseball umpires. Once they make a decision, they never change it.”
Mr. Crowley saw that his firm was losing thousands of dollars through the arguments he won. So while
taking my course, he resolved to change tactics and abandon arguments. With what results? Here is the story as
he told it to the fellow members of his class:
“One morning the phone rang in my office. A hot and bothered person at the other end proceeded to
inform me that a car of lumber we had shipped into his plant was entirely unsatisfactory. His firm had stopped
unloading and requested that we make immediate arrangements to remove the stock from their yard. After about
one-fourth of the car had been unloaded, their lumber inspector reported that the lumber was running 55 percent
below grade. Under the circumstances, they refused to accept it.
“I immediately started for his plant and on the way turned over in my mind the best way to handle the
situation. Ordinarily, under such circumstances, I should have quoted grading rules and tried, as a result of my
own experience and knowledge as a lumber inspector, to convince the other inspector that the lumber was
actually up to grade, and that he was misinterpreting the rules in his inspection. However, I thought I would
apply the principles learned in this training.
“When I arrived at the plant, I found the purchasing agent and the lumber inspector in a wicked humor,
both set for an argument and a fight. We walked out to the car that was being unloaded, and I requested that they
70
continue to unload so that I could see how things were going. I asked the inspector to go right ahead and lay out
the rejects, as he had been doing, and to put the good pieces in another pile.
“After watching him for a while it began to dawn on me that his inspection actually was much too strict
and that he was misinterpreting the rules. This particular lumber was white pine, and I knew the inspector was
thoroughly schooled in hard woods but not a competent, experienced inspector on white pine. White pine
happened to be my own strong suit, but did I offer any objection to the way he was grading the lumber? None
whatever. I kept on watching and gradually began to ask questions as to why certain pieces were not
satisfactory. I didn’t for one instant insinuate that the inspector was wrong. I emphasized that my only reason for
asking was in order that we could give his firm exactly what they wanted in future shipments.
“By asking questions in a very friendly, cooperative spirit, and insisting continually that they were right
in laying out boards not satisfactory to their purpose, I got him warmed up, and the strained relations between us
began to thaw and melt away. An occasional carefully put remark on my part gave birth to the idea in his mind
that possibly some of these rejected pieces were actually within the grade that they had bought, and that their
requirements demanded a more expensive grade. I was very careful, however, not to let him think I was making
an issue of this point.
“Gradually his whole attitude changed. He finally admitted to me that he was not experienced on white
pine and began to ask me questions about each piece as it came out of the car, I would explain why such a piece
came within the grade specified, but kept on insisting that we did not want him to take it if it was unsuitable for
their purpose. He finally got to the point where he felt guilty every time he put a piece in the rejected pile. And
at last he saw that the mistake was on their part for not having specified as good a grade as they needed.
“The ultimate outcome was that he went through the entire carload again after I left, accepted the whole
lot, and we received a check in full.
“In that one instance alone, a little tact, and the determination to refrain from telling the other man he
was wrong, saved my company a substantial amount of cash, and it would be hard to place a money value on the
good will that was saved.”
Martin Luther King was asked how, as a pacifist, he could be an admirer of Air Force General Daniel
“Chappie” James, then the nation’s highest-ranking black officer. Dr. King replied, “I judge people by their own
principles—not by my own.”
In a similar way, General Robert E. Lee once spoke to the president of the Confederacy, Jefferson
Davis, in the most glowing terms about a certain officer under his command. Another officer in attendance was
astonished. “General,” he said, “do you not know that the man of whom you speak so highly is one of your
bitterest enemies who misses no opportunity to malign you?” “Yes,” replied General Lee, “but the president
asked my opinion of him; he did not ask for his opinion of me.”
By the way, I am not revealing anything new in this chapter. Two thousand years ago, Jesus said:
“Agree with thine adversary quickly.”
And 2,200 years before Christ was born, King Akhtoi of Egypt gave his son some shrewd advice -
advice that is sorely needed today. “Be diplomatic,” counseled the King. “It will help you gain your point.”
In other words, don’t argue with your customer or your spouse or your adversary. Don’t tell them they
are wrong, don’t get them stirred up. Use a little diplomacy.
PRINCIPLE 2
Show respect for the other person’s opinions. Never say, “You're wrong.”
71
12
“IF YOU’RE WRONG, ADMIT IT.”
Within a minute’s walk of my house there was a wild stretch of virgin timber, where the blackberry
thickets foamed white in the springtime, where the squirrels nested and reared their young, and the horseweeds
grew as tall as a horse’s head. This unspoiled woodland was called Forest Park—and it was a forest, probably
not much different in appearance from what it was when Columbus discovered America. I frequently walked in
this park with Rex, my little Boston bulldog. He was a friendly, harmless little hound; and since we rarely met
anyone in the park, I took Rex along without a leash or a muzzle.
One day we encountered a mounted policeman in the park, a policeman itching to show his authority.
“‘What do you mean by letting that dog run loose in the park without a muzzle and leash?” he
reprimanded me. “Don’t you know it’s against the law?”
“Yes, I know it is,” I replied softy, “but I didn’t think he would do any harm out here.”
“You didn’t think! You didn’t think! The law doesn’t give a tinker’s damn about what you think. That
dog might kill a squirrel or bite a child. Now, I’m going to let you off this time; but if I catch this dog out here
again without a muzzle and a leash, you’ll have to tell it to the judge.”
I meekly promised to obey.
And I did obey—for a few times. But Rex didn’t like the muzzle, and neither did I; so we decided to
take a chance. Everything was lovely for a while, and then we struck a snag. Rex and I raced over the brow of a
hill one afternoon and there, suddenly—to my dismay—I saw the majesty of the law, astride a bay horse. Rex
was out in front, heading straight for the officer.
I was in for it. I knew it. So I didn’t wait until the policeman started talking. I beat him to it. I said:
“Officer, you’ve caught me red-handed. I’m guilty. I have no alibis, no excuses. You warned me last week that
if I brought the dog out here again without a muzzle you would fine me.”
“Well, now,” the policeman responded in a soft tone. “I know it’s a temptation to let a little dog like
that have a run out here when nobody is around.”
“Sure it’s a temptation,” I replied, “but it is against the law.”
“Well, a little dog like that isn’t going to harm anybody,” the policeman remonstrated.
“No, but he may kill squirrels,” I said.
“Well now, I think you are taking this a bit too seriously,” he told me. “I’ll tell you what you do. You
just let him run over the hill there where I can’t see him—and we’ll forget all about it.”
That policeman, being human, wanted a feeling of importance; so when I began to condemn myself,
the only way he could nourish his self-esteem was to take the magnanimous attitude of showing mercy.
But suppose I had tried to defend myself—well, did you ever argue with a policeman?
But instead of breaking lances with him, I admitted that he was absolutely right and I was absolutely
wrong; I admitted it quickly, openly, and with enthusiasm. The affair terminated graciously in my taking his
side and his taking my side. Lord Chesterfield himself could hardly have been more gracious than this mounted
policeman, who, only a week previously, had threatened to have the law on me.
72
If we know we are going to be rebuked anyhow, isn’t it far better to beat the other person to it and do it
ourselves? Isn’t it much easier to listen to self-criticism than to bear condemnation from alien lips?
Say about yourself all the derogatory things you know the other person is thinking or wants to say or
intends to say—and say them before that person has a chance to say them. The chances are a hundred to one that
a generous, forgiving attitude will be taken and your mistakes will be minimized just as the mounted policeman
did with me and Rex.
Ferdinand E. Warren, a commercial artist, used this technique to win the good will of a petulant,
scolding buyer of art.
“It is important, in making drawings for advertising and publishing purposes, to be precise and very
exact,” Mr. Warren said as he told the story.
“Some art editors demand that their commissions be executed immediately; and in these cases, some
slight error is liable to occur. I knew one art director in particular who was always delighted to find fault with
some little thing. I have often left his office in disgust, not because of the criticism, but because of his method of
attack. Recently I delivered a rush job to this editor, and he phoned me to call at his office immediately. He said
something was wrong. When I arrived, I found just what I had anticipated—and dreaded. He was hostile,
gloating over his chance to criticize. He demanded with heat why I had done so and so. My opportunity had
come to apply the self-criticism I had been studying about. So I said, ‘Mr. So-and-so, if what you say is true, I
am at fault and there is absolutely no excuse for my blunder. I have been doing drawings for you long enough to
know better. I’m ashamed of myself.’
“Immediately he started to defend me. ‘Yes, you’re right, but after all, this isn’t a serious mistake. It is
only…’
“I interrupted him. ‘Any mistake,’ I said, ‘may be costly and they are all irritating.’
“He started to break in, but I wouldn’t let him. I was having a grand time. For the first time in my life, I
was criticizing myself—and I loved it.
“‘I should have been more careful,’ I continued. ‘You give me a lot of work, and you deserve the best;
so I’m going to do this drawing all over.’
“‘No! No!’ he protested. ‘I wouldn’t think of putting you to all that trouble.’ He praised my work,
assured me that he wanted only a minor change and that my slight error hadn’t cost his firm any money; and,
after all, it was a mere detail—not worth worrying about.
“My eagerness to criticize myself took all the fight out of him. He ended up by taking me to lunch; and
before we parted, he gave me a check and another commission.”
There is a certain degree of satisfaction in having the courage to admit one’s errors. It not only clears
the air of guilt and defensiveness, but often helps solve the problem created by the error.
Bruce Harvey of Albuquerque, New Mexico, had incorrectly authorized payment of full wages to an
employee on sick leave. When he discovered his error, he brought it to the attention of the employee and
explained that to correct the mistake he would have to reduce his next paycheck by the entire amount of the
overpayment. The employee pleaded that as that would cause him a serious financial problem, could the money
be repaid over a period of time? In order to do this, Harvey explained, he would have to obtain his supervisor’s
approval. “And this I knew,” reported Harvey, “would result in a boss-type explosion. While trying to decide
how to handle this situation better, I realized that the whole mess was my fault and I would have to admit it to
my boss.
“I walked into his office, told him that I had made a mistake and then informed him of the complete
facts. He replied in an explosive manner that it was the fault of the personnel department. I repeated that it was
my fault. He exploded again about carelessness in the accounting department. Again I explained it was my fault.
He blamed two other people in the office. But each time I reiterated it was my fault. Finally, he looked at me
and said, ‘Okay, it was your fault. Now straighten it out.’ The error was corrected and nobody got into trouble. I
73
felt great because I was able to handle a tense situation and had the courage not to seek alibis. My boss has had
more respect for me ever since.”
Any fool can try to defend his or her mistakes—and most fools do—but it raises one above the herd
and gives one a feeling of nobility and exultation to admit one’s mistakes. For example, one of the most
beautiful things that history records about Robert E. Lee is the way he blamed himself and only himself for the
failure of Pickett’s charge at Gettysburg.
Pickett’s charge was undoubtedly the most brilliant and picturesque attack that ever occurred in the
Western world. General George E. Pickett himself was picturesque. He wore his hair so long that his auburn
locks almost touched his shoulders; and, like Napoleon in his Italian campaigns, he wrote ardent love letters
almost daily while on the battlefield. His devoted troops cheered him that tragic July afternoon as he rode off
jauntily toward the Union lines, his cap set at a rakish angle over his right ear. They cheered and they followed
him, man touching man, rank pressing rank, with banners flying and bayonets gleaming in the sun. It was a
gallant sight. Daring. Magnificent. A murmur of admiration ran through the Union lines as they beheld it.
Pickett’s troops swept forward at any easy trot, through orchard and cornfield, across a meadow and
over a ravine. All the time, the enemy’s cannon was tearing ghastly holes in their ranks, But on they pressed,
grim, irresistible.
Suddenly the Union infantry rose from behind the stonewall on Cemetery Ridge where they had been
hiding and fired volley after volley into Pickett's onrushing troops. The crest of the hill was a sheet of flame, a
slaughterhouse, a blazing volcano. In a few minutes, all of Pickett’s brigade commanders except one were
down, and four-fifths of his five thousand men had fallen.
General Lewis A. Armistead, leading the troops in the final plunge, ran forward, vaulted over the
stonewall, and, waving his cap on the top of his sword, shouted: “Give ‘em the steel, boys!”
They did. They leaped over the wall, bayoneted their enemies, smashed skulls with clubbed muskets,
and planted the battle flags of the South on Cemetery Ridge. The banners waved there only for a moment. But
that moment, brief as it was, recorded the high-water mark of the Confederacy.
Pickett’s charge—brilliant, heroic—was nevertheless the beginning of the end. Lee had failed. He
could not penetrate the North. And he knew it.
The South was doomed.
Lee was so saddened, so shocked, that he sent in his resignation and asked Jefferson Davis, the
president of the Confederacy, to appoint “a younger and abler man”. If Lee had wanted to blame the disastrous
failure of Pickett’s charge on someone else, he could have found a score of alibis. Some of his division
commanders had failed him. The cavalry hadn’t arrived in time to support the infantry attack. This had gone
wrong and that had gone awry.
But Lee was far too noble to blame others. As Pickett’s beaten and bloody troops struggled back to the
Confederate lines, Robert E. Lee rode out to meet them all alone and greeted them with a self-condemnation that
was little short of sublime. “All this has been my fault,” he confessed. “I and I alone have lost this battle.”
Few generals in all history have had the courage and character to admit that.
Michael Cheung, who teaches our course in Hong Kong, told of how the Chinese culture presents some
special problems and how sometimes it is necessary to recognize that the benefit of applying a principle may be
more advantageous than maintaining an old tradition. He had one middle-aged class member who had been
estranged from his son for many years. The father had been an opium addict, but was now cured. In Chinese
tradition an older person cannot take the first step. The father felt that it was up to his son to take the initiative
toward a reconciliation. In an early session, he told the class about the grandchildren he had never seen and how
much he desired to be reunited with his son. His classmates, all Chinese, understood his conflict between his
desire and long-established tradition. The father felt that young people should have respect for their elders and
that he was right in not giving in to his desire, but to wait for his son to come to him.
74
Toward the end of the course the father again addressed his class. “I have pondered this problem,” he
said. “Dale Carnegie says, ‘If you are wrong, admit it quickly and emphatically.’ It is too late for me to admit it
quickly, but I can admit it emphatically. I wronged my son. He was right in not wanting to see me and to expel
me from his life. I may lose face by asking a younger person’s forgiveness, but I was at fault and it is my
responsibility to admit this.” The class applauded and gave him their full support. At the next class he told how
he went to his son’s house, asked for and received forgiveness and was now embarked on a new relationship
with his son, his daughter-in-law and the grandchildren he had at last met.
Elbert Hubbard was one of the most original authors who ever stirred up a nation, and his stinging
sentences often aroused fierce resentment. But Hubbard with his rare skill for handling people frequently turned
his enemies into friends.
For example, when some irritated reader wrote in to say that he didn’t agree with such and such an
article and ended by calling Hubbard this and that, Elbert Hubbard would answer like this:
“Come to think it over, I don’t entirely agree with it myself. Not everything I wrote yesterday appeals
to me today. I am glad to learn what you think on the subject. The next time you are in the neighborhood you
must visit us and we’ll get this subject threshed out for all time. So here is a handclasp over the miles, and I am,
 Yours sincerely,
 Elbert Hubbard”
What could you say to a man who treated you like that?
When we are right, let’s try to win people gently and tactfully to our way of thinking, and when we are
wrong—and that will be surprisingly often, if we are honest with ourselves—let’s admit our mistakes quickly
and with enthusiasm. Not only will that technique produce astonishing results; but, believe it or not, it is a lot
more fun, under the circumstances, than trying to defend oneself.
Remember the old proverb: “By fighting you never get enough, but by yielding you get more than you
expected.”
PRINCIPLE 3
If you are wrong, admit it quickly and emphatically.
75
13
“A DROP OF HONEY.”
If your temper is aroused and you tell ‘em a thing or two, you will have a fine time unloading your
feelings. But what about the other person? Will he share your pleasure? Will your belligerent tones, your hostile
attitude, make it easy for him to agree with you?
“If you come at me with your fists doubled,” said Woodrow Wilson, “I think I can promise you that
mine will double as fast as yours; but if you come to me and say, ‘Let us sit down and take counsel together, and,
if we differ from each other, understand why it is that we differ, just what the points at issue are,’ we will
presently find that we are not so far apart after all, that the points on which we differ are few and the points on
which we agree are many, and that if we only have the patience and the candor and the desire to get together, we
will get together.”
Nobody appreciated the truth of Woodrow Wilson’s statement more than John D. Rockefeller, Jr. Back
in 1915, when Rockefeller was the most fiercely despised man in Colorado, one of the bloodiest strikes in the
history of American industry had been shocking the state for two terrible years. Irate, belligerent miners were
demanding higher wages from the Colorado Fuel and Iron Company; Rockefeller controlled that company.
Property had been destroyed; troops had been called out. Blood had been shed. Strikers had been shot, their
bodies riddled with bullets.
At a time like that, with the air seething with hatred, Rockefeller wanted to win the strikers to his way
of thinking. And he did it. How? Here’s the story. After weeks spent in making friends, Rockefeller addressed
the representatives of the strikers. This speech, in its entirety, is a masterpiece. It produced astonishing results. It
calmed the tempestuous waves of hate that threatened to engulf Rockefeller. It won him a host of admirers. It
presented facts in such a friendly manner that the strikers went back to work without saying another word about
the increase in wages for which they had fought so violently.
The opening of that remarkable speech follows. Note how it fairly glows with friendliness. Rockefeller,
remember, was talking to men who, a few days previously, had wanted to hang him by the neck to a sour apple
tree; yet he couldn’t have been more gracious, more friendly if he had addressed a group of medical
missionaries. His speech was radiant with such phrases as “I am proud to be here”, “having visited in your
homes”, “met many of your wives and children,” “we meet here not as strangers, but as friends”, “spirit of
mutual friendship”, “our common interests”, “it is only by your courtesy that I am here”, etc.
“This is a red-letter day in my life,” Rockefeller began. “It is the first time I have ever had the good
fortune to meet the representatives of the employees of this great company, its officers and superintendents,
together, and I can assure you that I am proud to be here, and that I shall remember this gathering as long as I
live. Had this meeting been held two weeks ago, I should have stood here a stranger to most of you, recognizing
a few faces. Having had the opportunity last week of visiting all the camps in the southern coal field and of
talking individually with practically all of the representatives, except those who were away; having visited in
your homes, met many of your wives and children, we meet here not as strangers, but as friends, and it is in that
spirit of mutual friendship that I am glad to have this opportunity to discuss with you our common interests.
“Since this is a meeting of the officers of the company and the representatives of the employees, it is
only by your courtesy that I am here, for I am not so fortunate as to be either one or the other; and yet I feel that
I am intimately associated with you men, for, in a sense, I represent both the stockholders and the directors.”
Isn’t that a superb example of the fine art of making friends out of enemies?
Suppose Rockefeller had taken a different tack. Suppose he had argued with those miners and hurled
devastating facts in their faces. Suppose he had told them by his tones and insinuations that they were wrong.
Suppose that, by all the rules of logic, he had proved that they were wrong. What would have happened? More
anger would have been stirred up, more hatred, more revolt.
76
If a man's heart is rankling with discord and ill feeling toward you, you can’t win him to your way of
thinking with all the logic in Christendom. Scolding parents and domineering bosses and husbands and nagging
wives ought to realize that people don’t want to change their minds. They can’t be forced or driven to agree
with you or me. But they may possibly be led to, if we are gentle and friendly, ever so gentle and ever so friendly.
Lincoln said that, in effect, over a hundred years ago. Here are his words: “It is an old and true maxim
that ‘a drop of honey catches more flies than a gallon of gall’. So with men, if you would win a man to your
cause, first convince him that you are his sincere friend. Therein is a drop of honey that catches his heart; which,
say what you will, is the great high road to his reason.”
Business executives have learned that it pays to be friendly to strikers. For example, when 2,500
employees in the White Motor Company’s plant struck for higher wages and a union shop, Robert F. Black, then
president of the company, didn’t lose his temper and condemn and threaten and talk of tyranny and Communists.
He actually praised the strikers. He published an advertisement in the Cleveland papers, complimenting them on
“the peaceful way in which they laid down their tools”. Finding the strike pickets idle, he bought them a couple
of dozen baseball bats and gloves and invited them to play ball on vacant lots. For those who preferred bowling,
he rented a bowling alley.
This friendliness on Mr. Black’s part did what friendliness always does: it begot friendliness. So the
strikers borrowed brooms, shovels, and rubbish carts, and began picking up matches, papers, cigarette stubs, and
cigar butts around the factory. Imagine it! Imagine strikers tidying up the factory grounds while battling for
higher wages and recognition of the union. Such an event had never been heard of before in the long,
tempestuous history of American labor wars. That strike ended with a compromise settlement within a weekended without any ill feeling or rancor.
Daniel Webster, who looked like a god and talked like Jehovah, was one of the most successful
advocates who ever pleaded a case; yet he ushered in his most powerful arguments with such friendly remarks
as: “It will be for the jury to consider,” “This may perhaps be worth thinking of,” “Here are some facts that I
trust you will not lose sight of,” or “You, with your knowledge of human nature, will easily see the significance
of these facts.” No bulldozing. No high-pressure methods. No attempt to force his opinions on others. Webster
used the soft-spoken, quiet, friendly approach, and it helped to make him famous.
You may never be called upon to settle a strike or address a jury, but you may want to get your rent
reduced. Will the friendly approach help you then? Let’s see.
O. L. Straub, an engineer, wanted to get his rent reduced. And he knew his landlord was hard-boiled. “I
wrote him,” Mr. Straub said in a speech before the class, “notifying him that I was vacating my apartment as
soon as my lease expired. The truth was, I didn’t want to move. I wanted to stay if I could get my rent reduced.
But the situation seemed hopeless. Other tenants had tried—and failed. Everyone told me that the landlord was
extremely difficult to deal with. But I said to myself, ‘I am studying a course in how to deal with people, so I’ll
try it on him—and see how it works.’
“He and his secretary came to see me as soon as he got my letter. I met him at the door with a friendly
greeting. I fairly bubbled with good will and enthusiasm. I didn’t begin talking about how high the rent was. I
began talking about how much I liked his apartment house. Believe me, I was ‘hearty in my approbation and
lavish in my praise.’ I complimented him on the way he ran the building and told him I should like so much to
stay for another year but I couldn’t afford it.
“He had evidently never had such a reception from a tenant. He hardly knew what to make of it.
“Then he started to tell me his troubles. Complaining tenants. One had written him fourteen letters,
some of them positively insulting. Another threatened to break his lease unless the landlord kept the man on the
floor above from snoring. ‘What a relief it is,’ he said, ‘to have a satisfied tenant like you.’ And then, without
my even asking him to do it, he offered to reduce my rent a little. I wanted more, so I named the figure I could
afford to pay, and he accepted without a word.
“As he was leaving, he turned to me and asked, ‘What decorating can I do for you?’
77
“If I had tried to get the rent reduced by the methods the other tenants were using, I am positive I
should have met with the same failure they encountered. It was the friendly, sympathetic, appreciative approach
that won.”
Dean Woodcock of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, is the superintendent of a department of the local electric
company. His staff was called upon to repair some equipment on top of a pole. This type of work had formerly
been performed by a different department and had only recently been transferred to Woodcock’s section.
Although his people had been trained in the work, this was the first time they had ever actually been called upon
to do it. Everybody in the organization was interested in seeing if and how they could handle it. Mr. Woodcock,
several of his subordinate managers, and members of other departments of the utility went to see the operation.
Many cars and trucks were there, and a number of people were standing around watching the two lone men on
top of the pole.
Glancing around, Woodcock noticed a man up the street getting out of his car with a camera. He began
taking pictures of the scene. Utility people are extremely conscious of public relations, and suddenly Woodcock
realized what this setup looked like to the man with the camera—overkill, dozens of people being called out to
do a two-person job. He strolled up the street to the photographer.
“I see you’re interested in our operation.”
“Yes, and my mother will be more than interested. She owns stock in your company. This will be an
eye-opener for her. She may even decide her investment was unwise. I’ve been telling her for years there’s a lot
of waste motion in companies like yours. This proves it. The newspapers might like these pictures, too.”
“It does look like it, doesn’t it? I’d think the same thing in your position. But this is a unique
situation…” and Dean Woodcock went on to explain how this was the first job of this type for his department
and how everybody from executives down was interested. He assured the man that under normal conditions two
people could handle the job. The photographer put away his camera, shook Woodcock’s hand, and thanked him
for taking the time to explain the situation to him.
Dean Woodcock’s friendly approach saved his company much embarrassment and bad publicity.
Another member of one of our classes, Gerald H. Winn of Littleton, New Hampshire, reported how by
using a friendly approach, he obtained a very satisfactory settlement on a damage claim.
“Early in the spring,” he reported, “before the ground had thawed from the winter freezing, there was
an unusually heavy rainstorm and the water, which normally would have run off to nearby ditches and storm
drains along the road, took a new course onto a building lot where I had just built a new home.
“Not being able to run off, the water pressure built up around the foundation of the house. The water
forced itself under the concrete basement floor, causing it to explode, and the basement filled with water. This
ruined the furnace and the hot-water heater. The cost to repair this damage was in excess of two thousand
dollars. I had no insurance to cover this type of damage.
“However, I soon found out that the owner of the subdivision had neglected to put in a storm drain near
the house which could have prevented this problem I made an appointment to see him. During the twenty-fivemile trip to his office, I carefully reviewed the situation and, remembering the principles I learned in this course,
I decided that showing my anger would not serve any worthwhile purpose, When I arrived, I kept very calm and
started by talking about his recent vacation to the West Indies; then, when I felt the timing was right, I
mentioned the ‘little’ problem of water damage. He quickly agreed to do his share in helping to correct the
problem.
“A few days later he called and said he would pay for the damage and also put in a storm drain to
prevent the same thing from happening in the future.
“Even though it was the fault of the owner of the subdivision, if I had not begun in a friendly way,
there would have been a great deal of difficulty in getting him to agree to the total liability.”
Years ago, when I was a barefoot boy walking through the woods to a country school out in northwest
Missouri, I read a fable about the sun and the wind. They quarreled about which was the stronger, and the wind
78
said, “I’ll prove I am. See the old man down there with a coat? I bet I can get his coat off him quicker than you
can.”
So the sun went behind a cloud, and the wind blew until it was almost a tornado, but the harder it blew,
the tighter the old man clutched his coat to him.
Finally, the wind calmed down and gave up, and then the sun came out from behind the clouds and
smiled kindly on the old man. Presently, he mopped his brow and pulled off his coat. The sun then told the wind
that gentleness and friendliness were always stronger than fury and force.
The use of gentleness and friendliness is demonstrated day after day by people who have learned that a
drop of honey catches more flies than a gallon of gall. F. Gale Connor of Lutherville, Maryland, proved this
when he had to take his four-month-old car to the service department of the car dealer for the third time. He told
our class, “It was apparent that talking to, reasoning with or shouting at the service manager was not going to
lead to a satisfactory resolution of my problems.
“I walked over to the showroom and asked to see the agency owner, Mr. White. After a short wait, I
was ushered into Mr. White’s office. I introduced myself and explained to him that I had bought my car from his
dealership because of the recommendations of friends who had had previous dealings with him. I was told that
his prices were very competitive and his service was outstanding. He smiled with satisfaction as he listened to
me. I then explained the problem I was having with the service department. ‘I thought you might want to be
aware of any situation that might tarnish your fine reputation,’ I added. He thanked me for calling this to his
attention and assured me that my problem would be taken care of. Not only did he personal get involved, but he
also lent me his car to use while mine was being repaired.”
Aesop was a Greek slave who lived at the court of Croesus and spun immortal fables six hundred years
before Christ. Yet the truths he taught about human nature are just as true in Boston and Birmingham now as
they were twenty-six centuries ago in Athens. The sun can make you take off your coat more quickly than the
wind; and kindliness, the friendly approach and appreciation can make people change their minds more readily
than all the bluster and storming in the world.
Remember what Lincoln said, “A drop of honey catches more flies than a gallon of gall.”
PRINCIPLE 4
Begin in a friendly way.
79
14
“THE SECRET OF SOCRATES.”
In talking with people, don’t begin by discussing the things on which you differ. Begin by
emphasizing—and keep on emphasizing—the things on which you agree. Keep emphasizing, if possible, that
you are both striving for the same end and that your only difference is one of method and not of purpose.
Get the other person saying “Yes, yes” at the outset. Keep your opponent, if possible, from saying
“No.” A “No” response, according to Professor Overstreet,* is a most difficult handicap to overcome. When you
have said “No,” all your pride of personality demands that you remain consistent with yourself. You may later
feel that the “No” was ill-advised; nevertheless, there is your precious pride to consider! Once having said a
thing, you feel you must stick to it. Hence it is of the very greatest importance that a person be started in the
affirmative direction.
* Harry A. Overstreet, lnfluencing Human Behavior (New York: Norton, 1925).
The skillful speaker gets, at the outset, a number of “Yes” responses. This sets the psychological
process of the listeners moving in the affirmative direction. It is like the movement of a billiard ball. Propel in
one direction, and it takes some force to deflect it; far more force to send it back in the opposite direction.
The psychological patterns here are quite clear. When a person says “No” and really means it, he or she
is doing far more than saying a word of two letters. The entire organism—glandular, nervous, muscular—
gathers itself together into a condition of rejection. There is, usually in minute but sometimes in observable
degree, a physical withdrawal or readiness for withdrawal. The whole neuromuscular system, in short, sets itself
on guard against acceptance. When, to the contrary, a person says “Yes,” none of the withdrawal activities takes
place. The organism is in a forward—moving, accepting, open attitude. Hence the more “Yeses” we can, at the
very outset, induce, the more likely we are to succeed in capturing the attention for our ultimate proposal.
It is a very simple technique—this “yes” response. And yet, how much it is neglected! It often seems as
if people get a sense of their own importance by antagonizing others at the outset.
Get a student to say “No” at the beginning, or a customer, child, husband, or wife, and it takes the
wisdom and the patience of angels to transform that bristling negative into an affirmative.
The use of this “yes, yes” technique enabled James Eberson, who was a teller in the Greenwich Savings
Bank, in New York City, to secure a prospective customer who might otherwise have been lost.
“This man came in to open an account,” said Mr. Eberson, “and I gave him our usual form to fill out.
Some of the questions he answered willingly, but there were others he flatly refused to answer.
“Before I began the study of human relations, I would have told this prospective depositor that if he
refused to give the bank this information, we should have to refuse to accept this account. I am ashamed that I
have been guilty of doing that very thing in the past. Naturally, an ultimatum like that made me feel good. I had
shown who was boss, that the bank’s rules and regulations couldn’t be flouted. But that sort of attitude certainly
didn’t give a feeling of welcome and importance to the man who had walked in to give us his patronage.
“I resolved this morning to use a little horse sense. I resolved not to talk about what the bank wanted
but about what the customer wanted. And above all else, I was determined to get him saying ‘yes, yes’ from the
very start. So I agreed with him. I told him the information he refused to give was not absolutely necessary.
“‘However,’ I said, ‘suppose you have money in this bank at your death. Wouldn’t you like to have the
bank transfer it to your next of kin, who is entitled to it according to law?’
“‘Yes, of course,’ he replied.
80
“‘Don’t you think,’ I continued, ‘that it would be a good idea to give us the name of your next of kin so
that, in the event of your death, we could carry out your wishes without error or delay?’
“Again he said, ‘Yes.’
“The young man’s attitude softened and changed when he realized that we weren’t asking for this
information for our sake but for his sake. Before leaving the bank, this young man not only gave me complete
information about himself but he opened, at my suggestion, a trust account, naming his mother as the
beneficiary for his account, and he had gladly answered all the questions concerning his mother also.
“I found that by getting him to say ‘yes, yes’ from theoutset, he forgot the issue at stake and was happy
to do all the things I suggested.”
Joseph Allison, a sales representative for Westinghouse Electric Company, had this story to tell: “There
was a man in my territory that our company was most eager to sell to. My predecessor had called on him for ten
years without selling anything. When I took over the territory, I called steadily for three years without getting an
order. Finally, after thirteen years of calls and sales talk, we sold him a few motors. If these proved to be all
right, an order for several hundred more would follow. Such was my expectation, right? I knew they would be
all right. So when I called three weeks later, I was in high spirits.
“The chief engineer greeted me with this shocking announcement: ‘Allison, I can’t buy the remainder
of the motors from you.’
“‘Why?’ I asked in amazement. ‘Why?’
“‘Because your motors are too hot. I can’t put my hand on them,’
“I knew it wouldn’t do any good to argue. I had tried that sort of thing too long. So I thought of getting
the ‘yes, yes’ response.
“‘Well, now look, Mr. Smith,’ I said. ‘I agree with you a hundred percent; if those motors are running
too hot, you ought not to buy any more of them. You must have motors that won’t run any hotter than standards
set by the National Electrical Manufacturers Association. Isn’t that so?’
“He agreed it was. I had gotten my first ‘yes.’
“‘The Electrical Manufacturers Association regulations say that a properly designed motor may have a
temperature of 72 degrees Fahrenheit above room temperature. Is that correct?’
“‘Yes,’ he agreed. ‘That’s quite correct. But your motors are much hotter.’
“I didn’t argue with him. I merely asked, ‘How hot is the mill room?’
“‘Oh,’ he said, ‘about 75 degrees Fahrenheit.’
“‘Well,’ I replied, ‘if the mill room is 75 degrees and you add 72 to that, that makes a total of 147
degrees Fahrenheit. Wouldn’t you scald your hand if you held it under a spigot of hot water at a temperature of
147 degrees Fahrenheit?’
“Again he had to say ‘yes.’
“‘Well,’ I suggested, ‘wouldn’t it he a good idea to keep your hands off those motors?’
“‘Well, I guess you’re right,’ he admitted. We continued to chat for a while. Then he called his
secretary and lined up approximately $35,000 worth of business for the ensuing month.
“It took me years and cost me countless thousands of dollars in lost business before I finally learned
that it doesn’t pay to argue, that it is much more profitable and much more interesting to look at things from the
other person’s viewpoint and try to get that person saying ‘yes, yes.’”
81
Eddie Snow, who sponsors our courses in Oakland, California, tells how he became a good customer of
a shop because the proprietor got him to say “yes, yes.” Eddie had become interested in bow hunting and had
spent considerable money in purchasing equipment and supplies from a local bow store. When his brother was
visiting him he wanted to rent a bow for him from this store. The sales clerk told him they didn’t rent bows, so
Eddie phoned another bow store. Eddie described what happened:
“A very pleasant gentleman answered the phone. His response to my question for a rental was
completely different from the other place. He said he was sorry but they no longer rented bows because they
couldn’t afford to do so. He then asked me if I had rented before. I replied, ‘Yes, several years ago.’ He
reminded me that I probably paid $25 to $30 for the rental. I said ‘yes’ again. He then asked if I was the kind of
person who liked to save money. Naturally, I answered ‘yes.’ He went on to explain that they had bow sets with
all the necessary equipment on sale for $34.95. I could buy a complete set for only $4.95 more than I could rent
one. He explained that is why they had discontinued renting them. Did I think that was reasonable? My ‘yes’
response led to a purchase of the set, and when I picked it up I purchased several more items at this shop and
have since become a regular customer.”
Socrates, “the gadfly of Athens,” was one of the greatest philosophers the world has ever known. He
did something that only a handful of men in all history have been able to do: he sharply changed the whole
course of human thought; and now, twenty-four centuries after his death, he is honored as one of the wisest
persuaders who ever influenced this wrangling world.
His method? Did he tell people they were wrong? Oh, no, not Socrates. He was far too adroit for that.
His whole technique, now called the ‘Socratic method’, was based upon getting a “yes, yes” response. He asked
questions with which his opponent would have to agree. He kept on winning one admission after another until
he had an armful of yeses. He kept on asking questions until finally, almost without realizing it, his opponents
found themselves embracing a conclusion they would have bitterly denied a few minutes previously.
The next time we are tempted to tell someone he or she is wrong, let’s remember old Socrates and ask a
gentle question—a question that will get the “yes, yes” response.
The Chinese have a proverb pregnant with the age-old wisdom of the Orient: “He who treads softly
goes far.”
They have spent five thousand years studying human nature, those cultured Chinese, and they have
garnered a lot of perspicacity: “He who treads softly goes far.”
PRINCIPLE 5
Get the other person saying “yes, yes” immediately.
82
15
“THE SAFETY VALVE IN HANDLING COMPLAINTS.”
Most people trying to win others to their way of thinking do too much talking themselves? Let the
other people talk themselves out. They know more about their business and problems than you do. So ask them
questions. Let them tell you a few things.
If you disagree with them you may be tempted to interrupt. But don’t. It is dangerous. They won’t pay
attention to you while they still have a lot of ideas of their own crying for expression. So listen patiently and
with an open mind. Be sincere about it. Encourage them to express their ideas fully.
Does this policy pay in business? Let’s see. Here is the story of a sales representative who was forced
to try it.
One of the largest automobile manufacturers in the United States was negotiating for a year’s
requirements of upholstery fabrics. Three important manufacturers had worked up fabrics in sample bodies.
These had all been inspected by the executives of the motor company, and notice had been sent to each
manufacturer saying that, on a certain day, a representative from each supplier would be given an opportunity to
make a final plea for the contract.
G.B.R., a representative of one manufacturer, arrived in town with a severe attack of laryngitis. “When
it came my turn to meet the executives in conference,” Mr. R---- said as he related the story before one of my
classes, “I had lost my voice. I could hardly whisper. I was ushered into a room and found myself face to face
with the textile engineer, the purchasing agent, the director of sales and the president of the company. I stood up
and made a valiant effort to speak, but I couldn’t do anything more than squeak.
“They were all seated around a table, so I wrote on a pad of paper: ‘Gentlemen, I have lost my voice. I
am speechless.’
“‘I’ll do the talking for you,’ the president said. He did. He exhibited my samples and praised their
good points. A lively discussion arose about the merits of my goods. And the president, since he was talking for
me, took the position I would have had during the discussion. My sole participation consisted of smiles, nods
and a few gestures.
“As a result of this unique conference, I was awarded the contract, which called for over half a million
yards of upholstery fabrics at an aggregate value of $1,600,000—the biggest order I had ever received.
“I know I would have lost the contract if I hadn’t lost my voice, because I had the wrong idea about the
whole proposition. I discovered, quite by accident, how richly it sometimes pays to let the other person do the
talking.’
Letting the other person do the talking helps in family situations as well as in business. Barbara
Wilson’s relationship with her daughter, Laurie, was deteriorating rapidly. Laurie, who had been a quiet,
complacent child, had grown into an uncooperative, sometimes belligerent teenager. Mrs. Wilson lectured her,
threatened her and punished her, but all to no avail.
“One day,” Mrs. Wilson told one of our classes, “I just gave up. Laurie had disobeyed me and had left
the house to visit her girl friend before she had completed her chores. When she returned I was about to scream
at her for the ten-thousandth time, but I just didn’t have the strength to do it. I just looked at her and said sadly,
‘Why, Laurie, Why?’
“Laurie noted my condition and in a calm voice asked, ‘Do you really want to know?’ I nodded and
Laurie told me, first hesitantly, and then it all flowed out. I had never listened to her. I was always telling her to
do this or that. When she wanted to tell me her thoughts, feelings, ideas, I interrupted with more orders. I began
83
to realize that she needed me—not as a bossy mother, but as a confidante, an outlet for all her confusion about
growing up. And all I had been doing was talking when I should have been listening. I never heard her.
“From that time on I let her do all the talking she wanted. She tells me what is on her mind, and our
relationship has improved immeasurably. She is again a cooperative person.”
A large advertisement appeared on the financial page of a New York newspaper calling for a person
with unusual ability and experience. Charles T. Cubellis answered the advertisement, sending his reply to a box
number. A few days later, he was invited by letter to call for an interview. Before he called, he spent hours in
Wall Street finding out everything possible about the person who had founded the business. During the
interview, he remarked, “I should be mighty proud to be associated with an organization with a record like yours.
I understand you started twenty-eight years ago with nothing but desk room and one stenographer. Is that true?”
Almost every successful person likes to reminisce about his early struggles. This man was no exception.
He talked for a long time about how he had started with $450 in cash and an original idea. He told how he had
fought against discouragement and battled against ridicule, working Sundays and holidays, twelve to sixteen
hours a day; how he had finally won against all odds until now the most important executives on Wall Street
were coming to him for information and guidance. He was proud of such a record. He had a right to be, and he
had a splendid time telling about it. Finally, he questioned Mr. Cubellis briefly about his experience, then called
in one of his vice presidents and said, “I think this is the person we are looking for.”
Mr. Cubellis had taken the trouble to find out about the accomplishments of his prospective employer.
He showed an interest in the other person and his problems. He encouraged the other person to do most of the
talking—and made a favorable impression.
Roy G. Bradley of Sacramento, California, had the opposite problem. He listened as a good prospect
for a sales position talked himself into a job with Bradley’s firm, Roy reported:
“Being a small brokerage firm, we had no fringe benefits, such as hospitalization, medical insurance
and pensions. Every representative is an independent agent. We don’t even provide leads for prospects, as we
cannot advertise for them as our larger competitors do.
“Richard Pryor had the type of experience we wanted for this position, and he was interviewed first by
my assistant, who told him about all the negatives related to this job. He seemed slightly discouraged when he
came into my office. I mentioned the one benefit of being associated with my firm, that of being an independent
contractor and therefore virtually being self-employed.
“As he talked about these advantages to me, he talked himself out of each negative thought he had
when he came in for the interview. Several times it seemed as though he was half talking to himself as he was
thinking through each thought. At times I was tempted to add to his thoughts; however, as the interview came to
a close I felt he had convinced himself, very much on his own, that he would like to work for my firm.
“Because I had been a good listener and let Dick do most of the talking, he was able to weigh both
sides fairly in his mind, and he came to the positive conclusion, which was a challenge he created for himself.
We hired him and he has been an outstanding representative for our firm.”
Even our friends would much rather talk to us about their achievements than listen to us boast about
ours. La Rochefoucauld, the French philosopher, said, “If you want enemies, excel your friends; but if you want
friends, let your friends excel you.”
Why is that true? Because when our friends excel us, they feel important; but when we excel them,
they—or at least some of them—will feel inferior and envious.
By far the best-liked placement counselor in the Mid-town Personnel Agency in New York City was
Henrietta G ----. It hadn’t always been that way. During the first few months of her association with the agency,
Henrietta didn’t have a single friend among her colleagues. Why? Because every day she would brag about the
placements she had made, the new accounts she had opened, and anything else she had accomplished.
“I was good at my work and proud of it,” Henrietta told one of our classes. “But instead of my
colleagues sharing my triumphs, they seemed to resent them. I wanted to be liked by these people. I really
84
wanted them to be my friends. After listening to some of the suggestions made in this course, I started to talk
about myself less and listen more to my associates. They also had things to boast about and were more excited
about telling me about their accomplishments than about listening to my boasting. Now, when we have some
time to chat, I ask them to share their joys with me, and I only mention my achievements when they ask.”
PRINCIPLE 6
Let the other person do a great deal of the talking.
85
16
“HOW TO GET COOPERATION.”
Don’t you have much more faith in ideas that you discover for yourself than in ideas that are handed to
you on a silver platter? If so, isn’t it bad judgment to try to ram your opinions down the throats of other people?
Isn’t it wiser to make suggestions—and let the other person think out the conclusion?
Adolph Seltz of Philadelphia, sales manager in an automobile showroom and a student in one of my
courses, suddenly found himself confronted with the necessity of injecting enthusiasm into a discouraged and
disorganized group of automobile salespeople. Calling a sales meeting, he urged his people to tell him exactly
what they expected from him. As they talked, he wrote their ideas on the blackboard. He then said, “I’ll give
you all these qualities you expect from me. Now I want you to tell me what I have a right to expect from you.”
The replies came quick and fast: loyalty, honesty, initiative, optimism, teamwork, eight hours a day of
enthusiastic work. The meeting ended with a new courage, a new inspiration—one salesperson volunteered to
work fourteen hours a day—and Mr. Seltz reported to me that the increase of sales was phenomenal.
“The people had made a sort of moral bargain with me,” said Mr. Seltz, “and as long as I lived up to
my part in it, they were determined to live up to theirs. Consulting them about their wishes and desires was just
the shot in the arm they needed.”
No one likes to feel that he or she is being sold something or told to do a thing. We much prefer to feel
that we are buying of our own accord or acting on our own ideas. We like to be consulted about our wishes, our
wants, our thoughts.
Take the case of Eugene Wesson. He lost countless thousands of dollars in commissions before he
learned this truth. Mr. Wesson sold sketches for a studio that created designs for stylists and textile
manufacturers. Mr. Wesson had called on one of the leading stylists in New York once a week, every week for
three years. “He never refused to see me,” said Mr. Wesson, “but he never bought. He always looked over my
sketches very carefully and then said, ‘No, Wesson, I guess we don’t get any today.’”
After 150 failures, Wesson realized he must be in a mental rut, so he resolved to devote one evening a
week to the study of influencing human behavior, to help him develop new ideas and generate new enthusiasm.
He decided on this new approach. With half a dozen unfinished artists’ sketches under his arm, he
rushed over to the buyer’s office. “I want you to do me a little favor, if you will,” he said. “Here are some
uncompleted sketches. Won’t you please tell me how we could finish them up in such a way that you could use
them?”
The buyer looked at the sketches for a while without uttering a word. Finally he said, “Leave these with
me for a few days, Wesson, and then come back and see me.”
Wesson returned three days later, got his suggestions, took the sketches back to the studio and had
them finished according to the buyer’s ideas. The result? All accepted.
After that, this buyer ordered scores of other sketches from Wesson, all drawn according to the buyer’s
ideas. “I realized why I had failed for years to sell him,” said Mr. Wesson. “I had urged him to buy what I
thought he ought to have. Then I changed my approach completely. I urged him to give me his ideas. This made
him feel that he was creating the designs. And he was. I didn’t have to sell him. He bought.”
Letting the other person feel that the idea is his or hers not only works in business and politics, it works
in family life as well. Paul M. Davis of Tulsa, Oklahoma, told his class how he applied this principle:
“My family and I enjoyed one of the most interesting sightseeing vacation trips we have ever taken. I
had long dreamed of visiting such historic sites as the Civil War battlefield in Gettysburg, Independence Hall in
86
Philadelphia, and our nation’s capital. Valley Forge, Jamestown and the restored colonial village of
Williamsburg were high on the list of things I wanted to see.
“In March my wife, Nancy, mentioned that she had ideas for our summer vacation which included a
tour of the western states, visiting points of interest in New Mexico, Arizona, California and Nevada. She had
wanted to make this trip for several years. But we couldn’t obviously make both trips.
“Our daughter, Anne, had just completed a course in U.S. history in junior high school and had become
very interested in the events that had shaped our country’s growth. I asked her how she would like to visit the
places she had learned about on our next vacation. She said she would love to.
“Two evenings later as we sat around the dinner table, Nancy announced that if we all agreed, the
summer’s vacation would be to the eastern states, that it would he a great trip for Anne and thrilling for all of us.
We all concurred.”
This same psychology was used by an X-ray manufacturer to sell his equipment to one of the largest
hospitals in Brooklyn This hospital was building an addition and preparing to equip it with the finest X-ray
department in America. Dr. L----, who was in charge of the X-ray department, was overwhelmed with sales
representatives, each caroling the praises of his own company’s equipment.
One manufacturer, however, was more skillful. He knew far more about handling human nature than
the others did. He wrote a letter something like this:
“Our factory has recently completed a new line of X-ray equipment. The first shipment of these
machines has just arrived at our office. They are not perfect. We know that, and we want to improve them. So
we should be deeply obligated to you if you could find time to look them over and give us your ideas about how
they can be made more serviceable to your profession. Knowing how occupied you are, I shall be glad to send
my car for you at any hour you specify.
“I was surprised to get that letter,” Dr. L ---- said as he related the incident before the class. “I was both
surprised and complimented. I had never had an X-ray manufacturer seeking my advice before. It made me feel
important. I was busy every night that week, but I canceled a dinner appointment in order to look over the
equipment. The more I studied it, the more I discovered for myself how much I liked it.
“Nobody had tried to sell it to me. I felt that the idea of buying that equipment for the hospital was my
own. I sold myself on its superior qualities and ordered it installed.”
Ralph Waldo Emerson in his essay “Self-Reliance” stated, “In every work of genius we recognize our
own rejected thoughts; they come back to us with a certain alienated majesty.”
Colonel Edward M. House wielded an enormous influence in national and international affairs while
Woodrow Wilson occupied the White House. Wilson leaned upon Colonel House for secret counsel and advice
more than he did upon even members of his own cabinet.
What method did the Colonel use in influencing the President? Fortunately, we know, for House
himself revealed it to Arthur D. Howden Smith, and Smith quoted House in an article in The Saturday Evening
Post:
“‘After I got to know the President,’ House said, ‘I learned the best way to convert him to an idea was
to plant it in his mind casually, but so as to interest him in it—so as to get him thinking about it on his own
account. The first time this worked it was an accident. I had been visiting him at the White House and urged a
policy on him which he appeared to disapprove. But several days later, at the dinner table, I was amazed to hear
him trot out my suggestion as his own.’”
Did House interrupt him and say, “That’s not your idea. That’s mine”? Oh, no. Not House. He was too
adroit for that. He didn’t care about credit. He wanted results. So he let Wilson continue to feel that the idea was
his. House did even more than that. He gave Wilson public credit for these ideas.
Let’s remember that everyone we come in contact with is just as human as Woodrow Wilson. So let’s
use Colonel House’s technique.
87
A man up in the beautiful Canadian province of New Brunswick used this technique on me and won
my patronage. I was planning at the time to do some fishing and canoeing in New Brunswick. So I wrote the
tourist bureau for information. Evidently my name and address were put on a mailing list, for I was immediately
overwhelmed with scores of letters and booklets and printed testimonials from camps and guides. I was
bewildered. I didn’t know which to choose. Then one camp owner did a clever thing. He sent me the names and
telephone numbers of several New York people who had stayed at his camp and he invited me to telephone
them and discover for myself what he had to offer.
I found to my surprise that I knew one of the men on his list. I telephoned him, found out what his
experience had been, and then wired the camp the date of my arrival.
The others had been trying to sell me on their service, but one let me sell myself. That organization
won. Twenty-five centuries ago, Lao-tse, a Chinese sage, said some things that readers of this book might use
today:
“The reason why rivers and seas receive the homage of a hundred mountain streams is that they keep
below them. Thus they are able to reign over all the mountain streams. So the sage, wishing to be above men,
putteth himself below them; wishing to be before them, he putteth himself behind them. Thus, though his place
be above men, they do not feel his weight; though his place be before them, they do not count it an injury.”
PRINCIPLE 7
Let the other person feel that the idea is his or hers.
88
17
“A FORMULA THAT WILL WORK WONDERS FOR YOU.”
Remember that other people may be totally wrong. But they don’t think so. Don’t condemn them. Any
fool can do that. Try to understand them. Only wise, tolerant, exceptional people even try to do that.
There is a reason why the other man thinks and acts as he does. Ferret out that reason—and you have
the key to his actions, perhaps to his personality. Try honestly to put yourself in his place.
If you say to yourself, “How would I feel, how would I react if I were in his shoes?” you will save
yourself time and irritation, for “by becoming interested in the cause, we are less likely to dislike the effect.”
And, in addition, you will sharply increase your skill in human relationships.
“Stop a minute,” says Kenneth M. Goode in his book How to Turn People Into Gold, “stop a minute to
contrast your keen interest in your own affairs with your mild concern about anything else. Realize then, that
everybody else in the world feels exactly the same way! Then, along with Lincoln and Roosevelt, you will have
grasped the only solid foundation for interpersonal relationships; namely, that success in dealing with people
depends on a sympathetic grasp of the other persons’ viewpoint.”
Sam Douglas of Hempstead, New York, used to tell his wife that she spent too much time working on
their lawn, pulling weeds, fertilizing, cutting the grass twice a week when the lawn didn’t look any better than it
had when they moved into their home four years earlier. Naturally, she was distressed by his remarks, and each
time he made such remarks the balance of the evening was ruined.
After taking our course, Mr. Douglas realized how foolish he had been all those years. It never
occurred to him that she enjoyed doing that work and she might really appreciate a compliment on her diligence.
One evening after dinner, his wife said she wanted to pull some weeds and invited him to keep her
company. He first declined, but then thought better of it and went out after her and began to help her pull weeds.
She was visibly pleased, and together they spent an hour in hard work and pleasant conversation.
After that he often helped her with the gardening and complimented her on how fine the lawn looked,
what a fantastic job she was doing with a yard where the soil was like concrete. Result: a happier life for both
because he had learned to look at things from her point of view—even if the subject was only weeds.
In his book Getting Through to People, Dr. Gerald S. Nirenberg commented, “Cooperativeness in
conversation is achieved when you show that you consider the other person’s ideas and feelings as important as
your own. Starting your conversation by giving the other person the purpose or direction of your conversation,
governing what you say by what you would want to hear if you were the listener, and accepting his or her
viewpoint will encourage the listener to have an open mind to your ideas.” *
* Dr Gerald S. Nirenberg, Getting Through to People (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1963), p. 31.
I have always enjoyed walking and riding in a park near my home. Like the Druids of ancient Gaul, I
all but worship an oak tree, so I was distressed season after season to see the young trees and shrubs killed off
by needless fires. These fires weren’t caused by careless smokers. They were almost all caused by youngsters
who went out to the park to go native and cook a frankfurter or an egg under the trees. Sometimes, these fires
raged so fiercely that the fire department had to be called out to fight the conflagration.
There was a sign on the edge of the park saying that anyone who started a fire was liable to fine and
imprisonment, but the sign stood in an unfrequented part of the park, and few of the culprits ever saw it. A
mounted policeman was supposed to look after the park; but he didn’t take his duties too seriously, and the fires
continued to spread season after season. On one occasion, I rushed up to a policeman and told him about a fire
spreading rapidly through the park and wanted him to notify the fire department, and he nonchalantly replied
that it was none of his business because it wasn’t in his precinct! I was desperate, so after that when I went
89
riding, I acted as a self-appointed committee of one to protect the public domain. In the beginning, I am afraid I
didn’t even attempt to see the other people’s point of view. When I saw a fire blazing under the trees, I was so
unhappy about it, so eager to do the right thing, that I did the wrong thing. I would ride up to the boys, warn
them that they could be jailed for starting a fire, order with a tone of authority that it be put out; and, if they
refused, I would threaten to have them arrested. I was merely unloading my feelings without thinking of their
point of view.
The result? They obeyed…obeyed sullenly and with resentment. After I rode on over the hill, they
probably rebuilt the fire and longed to burn up the whole park.
With the passing of the years, I acquired a trifle more knowledge of human relations, a little more tact,
a somewhat greater tendency to see things from the other person’s standpoint. Then, instead of giving orders, I
would ride up to a blazing fire and begin something like this:
“Having a good time, boys? What are you going to cook for supper? I loved to build fires myself when
I was a boy, and I still love to. But you know they are very dangerous here in the park. I know you boys don’t
mean to do any harm, but other boys aren’t so careful. They come along and see that you have built a fire; so
they build one and don’t put it out when they go home and it spreads among the dry leaves and kills the trees.
We won’t have any trees here at all if we aren’t more careful. You could be put in jail for building this fire. But
I don’t want to be bossy and interfere with your pleasure. I like to see you enjoy yourselves; but won’t you
please rake all the leaves away from the fire right now, and you’ll be careful to cover it with dirt, a lot of dirt,
before you leave, won’t you? And the next time you want to have some fun, won’t you please build your fire
over the hill there in the sandpit? It can’t do any harm there. Thanks so much, boys. Have a good time.”
What a difference that kind of talk made! It made the boys want to cooperate. No sullenness, no
resentment. They hadn’t been forced to obey orders. They had saved their faces. They felt better and I felt better
because I had handled the situation with consideration for their point of view.
Seeing things through another person’s eyes may ease tensions when personal problems become
overwhelming. Elizabeth Novak of New South Wales, Australia, was six weeks late with her car payment. “On
a Friday,” she reported, "I received a nasty phone call from the man who was handling my account informing
me if I did not come up with $122 by Monday morning I could anticipate further action from the company. I had
no way of raising the money over the weekend, so when I received his phone call first thing on Monday
morning I expected the worst. Instead of becoming upset I looked at the situation from his point of view. I
apologized most sincerely for causing him so much inconvenience and remarked that I must be his most
troublesome customer as this was not the first time I was behind in my payments. His tone of voice changed
immediately, and he reassured me that I was far from being one of his really troublesome customers. He went on
to tell me several examples of how rude his customers sometimes were, how they lied to him and often tried to
avoid talking to him at all. I said nothing. I listened and let him pour out his troubles to me. Then, without any
suggestion from me, he said it did not matter if I couldn’t pay all the money immediately. It would be all right if
I paid him $20 by the end of the month and made up the balance whenever it was convenient for me to do so.”
Tomorrow, before asking anyone to put out a fire or buy your product or contribute to your favorite
charity, why not pause and close your eyes and try to think the whole thing through from another person’s point
of view? Ask yourself: “Why should he or she want to do it?” True, this will take time, but it will avoid making
enemies and will get better results, and with less friction and less shoe leather.
“I would rather walk the sidewalk in front of a person’s office for two hours before an interview,” said
Dean Donham of the Harvard business school, “than step into that office without a perfectly clear idea of what I
was going to say and what that person—from my knowledge of his or her interests and motives—was likely to
answer.”
That is so important that I am going to repeat it in italics for the sake of emphasis.
I would rather walk the sidewalk in front of a person’s office for two hours before an interview than
step into that office without a perfectly clear idea of what I was going to say and what that person—from my
knowledge of his or her interests and motives—was likely to answer.
90
If, as a result of reading this book, you get only one thing—an increased tendency to think always in
terms of the other person’s point of view, and see things from that person’s angle as well as your own - if you
get only that one thing from this book, it may easily prove to be one of the stepping stones of your career.
PRINCIPLE 8
Try honestly to see things from the other person’s point of view.
91
18
“WHAT EVERYBODY WANTS.”
Wouldn't you like to have a magic phrase that would stop arguments, eliminate ill feeling, create good
will, and make the other person listen attentively?
Yes? All right. Here it is: “I don’t blame you one iota for feeling as you do. If I were you I would
undoubtedly feel just as you do.”
An answer like that will soften the most cantankerous old cuss alive. And you can say that and be 100
percent sincere, because if you were the other person you, of course, would feel just as he does. Take Al Capone,
for example. Suppose you had inherited the same body and temperament and mind that Al Capone had. Suppose
you had had his environment and experiences. You would then be precisely what he was, and where he was. For
it is those things—and only those things—that made him what he was. The only reason, for example, that you
are not a rattlesnake is that your mother and father weren’t rattlesnakes.
You deserve very little credit for being what you are—and remember, the people who come to you
irritated, bigoted, unreasoning, deserve very little discredit for being what they are. Feel sorry for the poor devils.
Pity them. Sympathize with them. Say to yourself, “There, but for the grace of God, go I.”
Three-fourths of the people you will ever meet are hungering and thirsting for sympathy. Give it to
them, and they will love you.
I once gave a broadcast about the author of Little Women, Louisa May Alcott. Naturally, I knew she
had lived and written her immortal books in Concord, Massachusetts. But, without thinking what I was saying, I
spoke of visiting her old home in Concord. New Hampshire. If I had said New Hampshire only once, it might
have been forgiven. But, alas and alack! I said it twice, I was deluged with letters and telegrams, stinging
messages that swirled around my defenseless head like a swarm of hornets. Many were indignant. A few
insulting. One Colonial Dame, who had been reared in Concord, Massachusetts, and who was then living in
Philadelphia, vented her scorching wrath upon me. She couldn’t have been much more bitter if I had accused
Miss Alcott of being a cannibal from New Guinea. As I read the letter, I said to myself, “Thank God, I am not
married to that woman.” I felt like writing and telling her that although I had made a mistake in geography, she
had made a far greater mistake in common courtesy. That was to be just my opening sentence. Then I was going
to roll up my sleeves and tell her what I really thought. But I didn’t. I controlled myself. I realized that any
hotheaded fool could do that, and that most fools would do just that.
I wanted to be above fools. So I resolved to try to turn her hostility into friendliness. It would be a
challenge, a sort of game I could play. I said to myself, “After all, if I were she, I would probably feel just as she
does.” So, I determined to sympathize with her viewpoint. The next time I was in Philadelphia, I called her on
the telephone. The conversation went something like this:
ME: Mrs. So-and-So, you wrote me a letter a few weeks ago, and I want to thank you for it.
SHE: (in incisive, cultured, well-bred tones): To whom have I the honor of speaking?
ME: I am a stranger to you. My name is Dale Carnegie. You listened to a broadcast I gave about Louisa
May Alcott a few Sundays ago, and I made the unforgivable blunder of saying that she had lived in
Concord, New Hampshire. It was a stupid blunder, and I want to apologize for it. It was so nice of you
to take the time to write me.
SHE: I am sorry, Mr. Carnegie, that I wrote as I did. I lost my temper. I must apologize.
ME: No! No! You are not the one to apologize; I am. Any school child would have known better than to
have said what I said. I apologized over the air the following Sunday, and I want to apologize to you
personally now.
92
SHE : I was born in Concord, Massachusetts. My family has been prominent in Massachusetts affairs for two
centuries, and I am very proud of my native state. I was really quite distressed to hear you say that Miss
Alcott had lived in New Hampshire. But I am really ashamed of that letter.
ME: I assure you that you were not one-tenth as distressed as I am. My error didn’t hurt Massachusetts, but
it did hurt me. It is so seldom that people of your standing and culture take the time to write people
who speak on the radio, and I do hope you will write me again if you detect an error in my talks.
SHE: You know, I really like very much the way you have accepted my criticism. You must be a very nice
person. I should like to know you better.
So, because I had apologized and sympathized with her point of view, she began apologizing and
sympathizing with my point of view, I had the satisfaction of controlling my temper, the satisfaction of returning
kindness for an insult. I got infinitely more real fun out of making her like me than I could ever have gotten out
of telling her to go and take a jump in the Schuylkill River.
Every man who occupies the White House is faced almost daily with thorny problems in human
relations. President Taft was no exception, and he learned from experience the enormous chemical value of
sympathy in neutralizing the acid of hard feelings. In his book Ethics in Service, Taft gives rather an amusing
illustration of how he softened the ire of a disappointed and ambitious mother.
“A lady in Washington,” wrote Taft, “whose husband had some political influence, came and labored
with me for six weeks or more to appoint her son to a position. She secured the aid of Senators and
Congressmen in formidable number and came with them to see that they spoke with emphasis. The place was
one requiring technical qualification, and following the recommendation of the head of the Bureau, I appointed
somebody else. I then received a letter from the mother, saying that I was most ungrateful, since I declined to
make her a happy woman as I could have done by a turn of my hand. She complained further that she had
labored with her state delegation and got all the votes for an administration bill in which I was especially
interested and this was the way I had rewarded her.
“When you get a letter like that, the first thing you do is to think how you can be severe with a person
who has committed an impropriety, or even been a little impertinent. Then you may compose an answer. Then if
you are wise, you will put the letter in a drawer and lock the drawer. Take it out in the course of two days - such
communications will always bear two days’ delay in answering, and when you take it out after that interval, you
will not send it. That is just the course I took. After that, I sat down and wrote her just as polite a letter as I could,
telling her I realized a mother’s disappointment under such circumstances, but that really the appointment was
not left to my mere personal preference, that I had to select a man with technical qualifications, and had,
therefore, to follow the recommendations of the head of the Bureau. I expressed the hope that her son would go
on to accomplish what she had hoped for him in the position which he then had. That mollified her and she
wrote me a note saying she was sorry she had written as she had.
“But the appointment I sent in was not confirmed at once, and after an interval I received a letter which
purported to come from her husband, though it was in the same handwriting as all the others. I was therein
advised that, due to the nervous prostration that had followed her disappointment in this case, she had to take to
her bed and had developed a most serious case of cancer of the stomach. Would I not restore her to health by
withdrawing the first name and replacing it by her son’s? I had to write another letter, this one to the husband, to
say that I hoped the diagnosis would prove to be inaccurate, that I sympathized with him in the sorrow he must
have in the serious illness of his wife, but that it was impossible to withdraw the name sent in. The man whom I
appointed was confirmed, and within two days after I received that letter, we gave a musicale at the White
House. The first two people to greet Mrs. Taft and me were this husband and wife, though the wife had so
recently been in articulo mortis.”
Jay Mangum represented an elevator-escalator maintenance company in Tulsa, Oklahoma, which had
the maintenance contract for the escalators in one of Tulsa’s leading hotels. The hotel manager did not want to
shut down the escalator for more than two hours at a time because he did not want to inconvenience the hotel’s
guests. The repair that had to be made would take at least eight hours, and his company did not always have a
specially qualified mechanic available at the convenience of the hotel.
When Mr. Mangum was able to schedule a top-flight mechanic for this job, he telephoned the hotel
manager and instead of arguing with him to give him the necessary time, he said, “Rick, I know your hotel is
93
quite busy and you would like to keep the escalator shutdown time to a minimum. I understand your concern
about this, and we want to do everything possible to accommodate you. However, our diagnosis of the situation
shows that if we do not do a complete job now, your escalator may suffer more serious damage and that would
cause a much longer shutdown. I know you would not want to inconvenience your guests for several days.”
The manager had to agree that an eight-hour shutdown was more desirable than several days. By
sympathizing with the manager’s desire to keep his patrons happy, Mr. Mangum was able to win the hotel
manager to his way of thinking easily and without rancor.
Joyce Norris, a piano teacher in St, Louis, Missouri, told of how she had handled a problem piano
teachers often have with teenage girls. Babette had exceptionally long fingernails. This is a serious handicap to
anyone who wants to develop proper piano-playing habits.
Mrs. Norris reported: “I knew her long fingernails would be a barrier for her in her desire to play well.
During our discussions prior to her starting her lessons with me, I did not mention anything to her about her
nails. I didn’t want to discourage her from taking lessons, and I also knew she would not want to lose that which
she took so much pride in and such great care to make attractive.
“After her first lesson, when I felt the time was right, I said, ‘Babette, you have attractive hands and
beautiful fingernails. If you want to play the piano as well as you are capable of and as well as you would like to,
you would be surprised how much quicker and easier it would be for you, if you would trim your nails shorter.
Just think about it, Okay?’ She made a face which was definitely negative. I also talked to her mother about this
situation, again mentioning how lovely her nails were. Another negative reaction. It was obvious that Babette’s
beautifully manicured nails were important to her.
“The following week Babette returned for her second lesson. Much to my surprise, the fingernails had
been trimmed. I complimented her and praised her for making such a sacrifice. I also thanked her mother for
influencing Babette to cut her nails. Her reply was ‘Oh, I had nothing to do with it. Babette decided to do it on
her own, and this is the first time she has ever trimmed her nails for anyone.’”
Did Mrs. Norris threaten Babette? Did she say she would refuse to teach a student with long fingernails?
No, she did not. She let Babette know that her fingernails were a thing of beauty and it would be a sacrifice to
cut them. She implied, “I sympathize with you—I know it won’t be easy, but it will pay off in your better
musical development.”
Sol Hurok was probably America’s number one impresario. For almost half a century he handled
artists—such world-famous artists as Chaliapin, Isadora Duncan, and Pavlova. Mr. Hurok told me that one of
the first lessons he had learned in dealing with his temperamental stars was the necessity for sympathy,
sympathy and more sympathy with their idiosyncrasies.
For three years, he was impresario for Feodor Chaliapin—one of the greatest bassos who ever thrilled
the ritzy boxholders at the Metropolitan, yet Chaliapin was a constant problem. He carried on like a spoiled
child. To put it in Mr. Hurok’s own inimitable phrase: “He was a hell of a fellow in every way.”
For example, Chaliapin would call up Mr. Hurok about noun of the day he was going to sing and say,
“Sol, I feel terrible. My throat is like raw hamburger. It is impossible for me to sing tonight.” Did Mr. Hurok
argue with him? Oh, no. He knew that an entrepreneur couldn’t handle artists that way. So he would rush over to
Chaliapin’s hotel, dripping with sympathy. “What a pity,” he would mourn. “What a pity! My poor fellow. Of
course, you cannot sing. I will cancel the engagement at once. It will only cost you a couple of thousand dollars,
but that is nothing in comparison to your reputation.”
Then Chaliapin would sigh and say, “Perhaps you had better come over later in the day. Come at five
and see how I feel then.”
At five o’clock, Mr. Hurok would again rush to his hotel, dripping with sympathy. Again he would
insist on canceling the engagement and again Chaliapin would sigh and say, “Well, maybe you had better come
to see me later. I may be better then.”
At seven-thirty the great basso would consent to sing, only with the understanding that Mr. Hurok
would walk out on the stage of the Metropolitan and announce that Chaliapin had a very bad cold and was not in
94
good voice. Mr. Hurok would lie and say he would do it, for he knew that was the only way to get the basso out
on the stage.
Dr. Arthur I. Gates said in his splendid book Educational Psychology: “Sympathy the human species
universally craves. The child eagerly displays his injury; or even inflicts a cut or bruise in order to reap abundant
sympathy. For the same purpose adults…show their bruises, relate their accidents, illness, especially details of
surgical operations. ‘Self-pity’ for misfortunes real or imaginary is in some measure, practically a universal
practice.”
So, if you want to win people to your way of thinking, put in practice…
PRINCIPLE 9
Be sympathetic with the other person’s ideas and desires.
95
19
“AN APPEAL THAT EVERYBODY LIKES.”
I was reared on the edge of the Jesse James country out in Missouri, and I visited the James farm at
Kearney, Missouri, where the son of Jesse James was then living.
His wife told me stories of how Jesse robbed trains and held up banks and then gave money to the
neighboring farmers to pay off their mortgages.
Jesse James probably regarded himself as an idealist at heart, just as Dutch Schultz, “Two Gun”
Crowley, Al Capone and many other organized crime “godfathers” did generations later. The fact is that all
people you meet have a high regard for themselves and like to be fine and unselfish in their own estimation.
J. Pierpont Morgan observed, in one of his analytical interludes, that a person usually has two reasons
for doing a thing: one that sounds good and a real one.
The person himself will think of the real reason. You don’t need to emphasize that. But all of us, being
idealists at heart, like to think of motives that sound good. So, in order to change people, appeal to the nobler
motives.
Is that too idealistic to work in business? Let’s see. Let’s take the case of Hamilton J. Farrell of the
Farrell-Mitchell Company of Glenolden, Pennsylvania. Mr. Farrell had a disgruntled tenant who threatened to
move. The tenant’s lease still had four months to run; nevertheless, he served notice that he was vacating
immediately, regardless of lease.
“These people had lived in my house all winter—the most expensive part of the year,” Mr. Farrell said
as he told the story to the class, “and I knew it would be difficult to rent the apartment again before fall. I could
see all that rent income going over the hill and believe me, I saw red.
“Now, ordinarily, I would have waded into that tenant and advised him to read his lease again. I would
have pointed out that if he moved, the full balance of his rent would fall due at once—and that I could, and
would, move to collect.
“However, instead of flying off the handle and making a scene, I decided to try other tactics. So I
started like this: ‘Mr. Doe,’ I said, ‘I have listened to your story, and I still don’t believe you intend to move.
Years in the renting business have taught me something about human nature, and I sized you up in the first place
as being a man of your word. In fact, I’m so sure of it that I’m willing to take a gamble.
“‘Now, here’s my proposition. Lay your decision on the table for a few days and think it over. If you
come back to me between now and the first of the month, when your rent is due, and tell me you still intend to
move, I give you my word I will accept your decision as final. I will privilege you to move and admit to myself
I’ve been wrong in my judgment. But I still believe you’re a man of your word and will live up to your contract.
For after all, we are either men or monkeys—and the choice usually lies with ourselves!’
“Well, when the new month came around, this gentleman came to see me and paid his rent in person.
He and his wife had talked it over, he said—and decided to stay. They had concluded that the only honorable
thing to do was to live up to their lease.”
When the late Lord Northcliffe found a newspaper using a picture of him which he didn’t want
published, he wrote the editor a letter. But did he say, “Please do not publish that picture of me any more; I
don’t like it”? No, he appealed to a nobler motive. He appealed to the respect and love that all of us have for
motherhood. He wrote, “Please do not publish that picture of me any more. My mother doesn’t like it.”
When John D. Rockefeller, Jr., wished to stop newspaper photographers from snapping pictures of his
children, he too appealed to the nobler motives. He didn’t, say: “I don’t want their pictures published.” No, he
96
appealed to the desire, deep in all of us, to refrain from harming children. He said: “You know how it is, boys.
You’ve got children yourselves, some of you. And you know it’s not good for youngsters to get too much
publicity.”
When Cyrus H. K. Curtis, the poor boy from Maine, was starting on his meteoric career, which was
destined to make him millions as owner of The Saturday Evening Post and the Ladies’ Home Journal, he
couldn’t afford to pay his contributors the prices that other magazines paid. He couldn’t afford to hire first-class
authors to write for money alone. So he appealed to their nobler motives. For example, he persuaded even
Louisa May Alcott, the immortal author of Little Women, to write for him when she was at the flood tide of her
fame; and he did it by offering to send a check for a hundred dollars, not to her, but to her favorite charity.
Right here the skeptic may say: “Oh, that stuff is all right for Northcliffe and Rockefeller or a
sentimental novelist. But, I’d like to see you make it work with the tough babies I have to collect bills from!”
You may be right. Nothing will work in all cases—and nothing will work with all people. If you are
satisfied with the results you are now getting, why change? If you are not satisfied, why not experiment?
At any rate, I think you will enjoy reading this true story told by James L. Thomas, a former student of
mine:
Six customers of a certain automobile company refused to pay their bills for servicing. None of the
customers protested the entire bill, but each claimed that some one charge was wrong. In each case, the
customer had signed for the work done, so the company knew it was right—and said so. That was the first
mistake.
Here are the steps the men in the credit department took to collect these overdue bills. Do you suppose
they succeeded?
1. They called on each customer and told him bluntly that they had come to collect a bill that was long past
due.
2. They made it very plain that the company was absolutely and unconditionally right; therefore he, the
customer, was absolutely and unconditionally wrong.
3. They intimated that they, the company, knew more about automobiles than he could ever hope to know. So
what was the argument about?
4. Result: They argued.
Did any of these methods reconcile the customer and settle the account? You can answer that one
yourself.
At this stage of affairs, the credit manager was about to open fire with a battery of legal talent, when
fortunately the matter came to the attention of the general manager. The manager investigated these defaulting
clients and discovered that they all had the reputation of paying their bills promptly, Something was wrong
here—something was drastically wrong about the method of collection. So he called in James L. Thomas and
told him to collect these “uncollectible” accounts.
Here, in his words, are the steps Mr. Thomas took:
1. My visit to each customer was likewise to collect a bill long past due—a bill that we knew was absolutely
right. But I didn’t say a word about that. I explained I had called to find out what it was the company had
done, or failed to do.
2. I made it clear that, until I had heard the customer’s story, I had no opinion to offer. I told him the company
made no claims to being infallible.
3. I told him I was interested only in his car, and that he knew more about his car than anyone else in the
world; that he was the authority on the subject.
97
4. I let him talk, and I listened to him with all the interest and sympathy that he wanted—and had expected.
5. Finally, when the customer was in a reasonable mood, I put the whole thing up to his sense of fair play. I
appealed to the nobler motives. “First,” I said, "I want you to know I also feel this matter has been badly
mishandled. You’ve been inconvenienced and annoyed and irritated by one of our representatives. That
should never have happened. I’m sorry and, as a representative of the company, I apologize. As I sat here
and listened to your side of the story, I could not help being impressed by your fairness and patience. And
now, because you are fair-minded and patient, I am going to ask you to do something for me. It’s something
that you can do better than anyone else, something you know more about than anyone else. Here is your bill;
I know it is safe for me to ask you to adjust it, just as you would do if you were the president of my
company. I am going to leave it all up to you. Whatever you say goes.”
Did he adjust the bill? He certainly did, and got quite a kick out of it. The bills ranged from $150 to
$400—but did the customer give himself the best of it? Yes, one of them did! One of them refused to pay a
penny of the disputed charge; but the other five all gave the company the best of it! And here’s the cream of the
whole thing: we delivered new cars to all six of these customers within the next two years!
“Experience has taught me,” says Mr. Thomas, “that when no information can be secured about the
customer, the only sound basis on which to proceed is to assume that he or she is sincere, honest, truthful and
willing and anxious to pay the charges, once convinced they are correct. To put it differently and perhaps mare
clearly, people are honest and want to discharge their obligations. The exceptions to that rule are comparatively
few, and I am convinced that the individuals who are inclined to chisel will in most cases react favorably if you
make them feel that you consider them honest, upright and fair."
PRINCIPLE 10
Appeal to the nobler motives.
98
20
“THE MOVIES DO IT. TV DOES IT. WHY DON’T YOU DO
IT?”
Many years ago, the Philadelphia Evening Bulletin was being maligned by a dangerous whispering
campaign. A malicious rumor was being circulated. Advertisers were being told that the newspaper was no
longer attractive to readers because it carried too much advertising and too little news. Immediate action was
necessary. The gossip had to be squelched.
But how?
This is the way it was done.
The Bulletin clipped from its regular edition all reading matter of all kinds on one average day,
classified it, and published it as a book. The book was called One Day. It contained 307 pages—as many as a
hard-covered book; yet the Bulletin had printed all this news and feature material on one day and sold it, not for
several dollars, but for a few cents.
The printing of that book dramatized the fact that the Bulletin carried an enormous amount of
interesting reading matter. It conveyed the facts more vividly, more interestingly, more impressively, than pages
of figures and mere talk could have done.
This is the day of dramatization. Merely stating a truth isn’t enough. The truth has to be made vivid,
interesting, dramatic. You have to use showmanship. The movies do it. Television does it. And you will have to
do it if you want attention.
Experts in window display know the power of dramatization. For example, the manufacturers of a new
rat poison gave dealers a window display that included two live rats. The week the rats were shown, sales
zoomed to five times their normal rate.
Television commercials abound with examples of the use of dramatic techniques in selling products.
Sit down one evening in front of your television set and analyze what the advertisers do in each of their
presentations. You will note how an antacid medicine changes the color of the acid in a test tube while its
competitor doesn’t, how one brand of soap or detergent gets a greasy shirt clean when the other brand leaves it
gray. You’ll see a car maneuver around a series of turns and curves—far better than just being told about it.
Happy faces will show contentment with a variety of products. All of these dramatize for the viewer the
advantages offered by whatever is being sold—and they do get people to buy them.
You can dramatize your ideas in business or in any other aspect of your life. It’s easy. Jim Yeamans,
who sells for the NCR company (National Cash Register) in Richmond, Virginia, told how he made a sale by
dramatic demonstration.
“Last week I called on a neighborhood grocer and saw that the cash registers he was using at his
checkout counters were very old-fashioned. I approached the owner and told him, ‘You are literally throwing
away pennies every time a customer goes through your line.’ With that I threw a handful of pennies on the floor.
He quickly became more attentive. The mere words should have been of interest to him, but the sound of
pennies hitting the floor really stopped him. I was able to get an order from him to replace all of his old
machines.”
It works in home life as well. When the old-time lover proposed to his sweetheart, did he just use
words of love? No! He went down on his knees. That really showed he meant what he said. We don’t propose
on our knees any more, but many suitors still set up a romantic atmosphere before they pop the question.
Dramatizing what you want works with children as well. Joe B. Fant, Jr., of Birmingham, Alabama,
was having difficulty getting his five-year-old boy and three-year-old daughter to pick up their toys, so he
99
invented a ‘train’. Joey was the engineer (Captain Casey Jones) on his tricycle. Janet’s wagon was attached, and
in the evening she loaded all the “coal” on the caboose (her wagon) and then jumped in while her brother drove
her around the room. In this way the room was cleaned up—without lectures, arguments or threats.
Mary Catherine Wolf of Mishawaka, Indiana, was having some problems at work and decided that she
had to discuss them with the boss. On Monday morning she requested an appointment with him but was told he
was very busy and she should arrange with his secretary for an appointment later in the week. The secretary
indicated that his schedule was very tight, but she would try to fit her in.
Ms. Wolf described what happened:
“I did not get a reply from her all week long. Whenever I questioned her, she would give me a reason
why the boss could not see me. Friday morning came and I had heard nothing definite. I really wanted to see
him and discuss my problems before the weekend, so I asked myself how I could get him to see me.
“What I finally did was this. I wrote him a formal letter. I indicated in the letter that I fully understood
how extremely busy he was all week, but it was important that I speak with him. I enclosed a form letter and a
self-addressed envelope and asked him to please fill it out or ask his secretary to do it and return it to me. The
form letter read as follows:
Ms. Wolf, I will be able to see you on __________ at __________ A.M/P.M. I will give you
__________ minutes of my time.
“I put this letter in his in-basket at 11 A.M. At 2 P.M. I checked my mailbox. There was my selfaddressed envelope. He had answered my form letter himself and indicated he could see me that afternoon and
could give me ten minutes of his time. I met with him, and we talked for over an hour and resolved my problems.
“If I had not dramatized to him the fact that I really wanted to see him, I would probably be still
waiting for an appointment.”
James B. Boynton had to present a lengthy market report. His firm had just finished an exhaustive
study for a leading brand of cold cream. Data were needed immediately about the competition in this market; the
prospective customer was one of the biggest—and most formidable—men in the advertising business.
And his first approach failed almost before he began.
“The first time I went in,” Mr. Boynton explains, “I found myself sidetracked into a futile discussion of
the methods used in the investigation. He argued and I argued. He told me I was wrong, and I tried to prove that
I was right.
“I finally won my point, to my own satisfaction—but my time was up, the interview was over, and I
still hadn’t produced results.
“The second time, I didn’t bother with tabulations of figures and data. I went to see this man. I
dramatized my facts.
“As I entered his office, he was busy on the phone. While he finished his conversation, I opened a
suitcase and dumped thirty-two jars of cold cream on top of his desk—all products he knew—all competitors of
his cream.
“On each jar, I had a tag itemizing the results of the trade investigation, And each tag told its story
briefly, dramatically.
“What happened?
“There was no longer an argument. Here was something new, something different. He picked up first
one and then another of the jars of cold cream and read the information on the tag. A friendly conversation
developed. He asked additional questions. He was intensely interested. He had originally given me only ten
minutes to present my facts, but ten minutes passed, twenty minutes, forty minutes, and at the end of an hour we
were still talking.
100
“I was presenting the same facts this time that I had presented previously. But this time I was using
dramatization, showmanship—and what a difference it made.”
PRINCIPLE 11
Dramatize your ideas.
101
21
“WHEN NOTHING ELSE WORKS, TRY THIS.”
Charles Schwab had a mill manager whose people weren’t producing their quota of work.
“How is it,” Schwab asked him, “that a manager as capable as you can’t make this mill turn out what it
should?”
“I don’t know,” the manager replied. “I’ve coaxed the men, I’ve pushed them, I’ve sworn and cussed,
I’ve threatened them with damnation and being fired. But nothing works. They just won’t produce.”
This conversation took place at the end of the day, just before the night shift came on. Schwab asked
the manager for a piece of chalk, then, turning to the nearest man, asked, “How many heats did your shift make
today?”

“Six.”
Without another word, Schwab chalked a big figure six on the floor, and walked away.
When the night shift came in, they saw the “6” and asked what it meant.
“The big boss was in here today,” the day people said. “He asked us how many heats we made, and we
told him six. He chalked it down on the floor.”
The next morning Schwab walked through the mill again. The night shift had rubbed out “6” and
replaced it with a big “7.”
When the day shift reported for work the next morning, they saw a big “7” chalked on the floor. So the
night shift thought they were better than the day shift did they? Well, they would show the night shift a thing or
two. The crew pitched in with enthusiasm, and when they quit that night, they left behind them an enormous,
swaggering “10”. Things were stepping up.
Shortly this mill, which had been lagging way behind in production, was turning out more work than
any other mill in the plant.
The principle?
Let Charles Schwab say it in his own words: “The way to get things done,” say Schwab, “is to
stimulate competition. I do not mean in a sordid, money-getting way, but in the desire to excel.”
The desire to excel! The challenge! Throwing down the gauntlet! An infallible way of appealing to
people of spirit.
Without a challenge, Theodore Roosevelt would never have been President of the United States. The
Rough Rider, just back from Cuba, was picked for governor of New York State. The opposition discovered he
was no longer a legal resident of the state, and Roosevelt, frightened, wished to withdraw. Then Thomas Collier
Platt, then U.S. Senator from New York, threw down the challenge. Turning suddenly on Theodore Roosevelt,
he cried in a ringing voice, “Is the hero of San Juan Hill a coward?”
Roosevelt stayed in the fight—and the rest is history. A challenge not only changed his life; it had a
real effect upon the future of his nation.
“All men have fears, but the brave put down their fears and go forward, sometimes to death, but always
to victory” was the motto of the King’s Guard in ancient Greece. What greater challenge can be offered than the
opportunity to overcome those fears?
102
When Al Smith was governor of New York, he was up against it. Sing Sing, at the time the most
notorious penitentiary west of Devil's Island, was without a warden. Scandals had been sweeping through the
pristin walls, scandals and ugly rumors. Smith needed a strong man to rule Sing Sing—an iron man. But who?
He sent for Lewis E. Lawes of New Hampton.
“How about going up to take charge of Sing Sing?” he said jovially when Lawes stood before him.
“They need a man up there with experience.”
Lawes was flabbergasted. He knew the dangers of Sing Sing. It was a political appointment, subject to
the vagaries of political whims. Wardens had come and gone—one had lasted only three weeks. He had a career
to consider. Was it worth the risk?
Then Smith, who saw his hesitation, leaned back in his chair and smiled. “Young fellow,” he said, “I
don’t blame you for being scared. It’s a tough spot. It’ll take a big person to go up there and stay.”
So Smith was throwing down a challenge, was he? Lawes liked the idea of attempting a job that called
for someone “big”.
So he went. And he stayed. He stayed, to become the most famous warden of his time. His book 20,000
Years in Sing Sing sold into the hundred of thousands of copies. His broadcasts on the air and his stories of
prison life have inspired dozens of movies. His “humanizing” of criminals wrought miracles in the way of
prison reform.
“I have never found,” said Harvey S. Firestone, founder of the great Firestone Tire and Rubber
Company, “that pay and pay alone would either bring together or hold good people. I think it was the game
itself.”
Frederic Herzberg, one of the great behavorial scientists, concurred. He studied in depth the work
attitudes of thousands of people ranging from factory workers to senior executives. What do you think he found
to be the most motivating factor—the one facet of the jobs that was most stimulating? Money? Good working
conditions? Fringe benefits? No, not any of those. The one major factor that motivated people was the work
itself. If the work was exciting and interesting, the worker looked forward to doing it and was motivated to do a
good job.
That is what every successful person loves: the game. The chance for self-expression. The chance to
prove his or her worth, to excel, to win. That is what makes foot-races and hog-calling and pie-eating contests.
The desire to excel. The desire for a feeling of importance.
PRINCIPLE 12
Throw down a challenge.
In a Nutshell
HOW TO WIN PEOPLE TO YOUR WAY OF THINKING
PRINCIPLE 1
The only way to get the best of an argument is to avoid it.

PRINCIPLE 2
Show respect for the other person's opinions. Never say, "You're wrong."

PRINCIPLE 3
If you are wrong, admit it quickly and emphatically.
PRINCIPLE 4
103
Begin in a friendly way.
PRINCIPLE 5
Get the other person saying “yes, yes” immediately.
PRINCIPLE 6
Let the other person do a great deal of the talking.
PRINCIPLE 7
Let the other person feel that the idea is his or hers.
PRINCIPLE 8
Try honestly to see things from the other person's point of view.
PRINCIPLE 9
Be sympathetic with the other person's ideas and desires.
PRINCIPLE 10
Appeal to the nobler motives.
PRINCIPLE 11
Dramatize your ideas.
PRINCIPLE 12
Throw down a challenge.
104
PART FOUR
Be A Leader: How To Change People Without
Giving Offence Or Arousing Resentment
105
22
“IF YOU MUST FIND FAULT, THIS IS THE WAY TO BEGIN.”
A friend of mine was a guest at the White House for a weekend during the administration of Calvin
Coolidge. Drifting into the President’s private office, he heard Coolidge say to one of his secretaries, “That’s a
pretty dress you are wearing this morning, and you are a very attractive young woman.”
That was probably the most effusive praise Silent Cal had ever bestowed upon a secretary in his life. It
was so unusual, so unexpected, that the secretary blushed in confusion. Then Coolidge said, “Now, don’t get
stuck up. I just said that to make you feel good. From now on, I wish you would be a little bit more careful with
your punctuation.”
His method was probably a bit obvious, but the psychology was superb. It is always easier to listen to
unpleasant things after we have heard some praise of our good points.
A barber lathers a man before he shaves him; and that is precisely what McKinley did back in 1896,
when he was running for President. One of the prominent Republicans of that day had written a campaign
speech that he felt was just a trifle better than Cicero and Patrick Henry and Daniel Webster all rolled into one.
With great glee, this chap read his immortal speech aloud to McKinley. The speech had its fine points, but it just
wouldn’t do. It would have raised a tornado of criticism. McKinley didn’t want to hurt the man’s feelings. He
must not kill the man’s splendid enthusiasm, and yet he had to say ‘no’. Note how adroitly he did it.
“My friend, that is a splendid speech, a magnificent speech,” McKinley said. “No one could have
prepared a better one. There are many occasions on which it would be precisely the right thing to say, but is it
quite suitable to this particular occasion? Sound and sober as it is from your standpoint, I must consider its
effect from the party’s standpoint. Now you go home and write a speech along the lines I indicate, and send me
a copy of it.”
He did just that. McKinley blue-penciled and helped him rewrite his second speech, and he became one
of the effective speakers of the campaign.
Here is the second most famous letter that Abraham Lincoln ever wrote. (His most famous one was
written to Mrs. Bixby, expressing his sorrow for the death of the five sons she had lost in battle.) Lincoln
probably dashed this letter off in five minutes; yet it sold at public auction in 1926 for twelve thousand dollars,
and that, by the way, was more money than Lincoln was able to save during half a century of hard work. The
letter was written to General Joseph Hooker on April 26, 1863, during the darkest period of the Civil War. For
eighteen months, Lincoln’s generals had been leading the Union Army from one tragic defeat to another.
Nothing but futile, stupid human butchery. The nation was appalled. Thousands of soldiers had deserted from
the army, and then the Republican members of the Senate had revolted and wanted to force Lincoln out of the
White House. “We are now on the brink of destruction,” Lincoln said. It appears to me that even the Almighty is
against us. I can hardly see a ray of hope.” Such was the black sorrow and chaos out of which this letter came.
I am printing the letter here because it shows how Lincoln tried to change an obstreperous general
when the very fate of the nation could have depended upon the general’s action.
This is perhaps the sharpest letter Abe Lincoln wrote after he became President; yet you will note that
he praised General Hooker before he spoke of his grave faults.
Yes, they were grave faults, but Lincoln didn’t call them that. Lincoln was more conservative, more
diplomatic. Lincoln wrote, “There are some things in regard to which I am not quite satisfied with you.” Talk
about tact! And diplomacy!
Here is the letter addressed to General Hooker:
I have placed you at the head of the Army of the Potomac.
106
Of course, I have done this upon what appears to me to be sufficient reasons, and yet I think it best for
you to know that there are some things in regard to which I am not quite satisfied with you.
I believe you to be a brave and skillful soldier, which, of course, I like. I also believe you do not mix
politics with your profession, in which you are right. You have confidence in yourself, which is a valuable if not
an indispensable quality.
You are ambitious, which, within reasonable bounds, does good rather than harm, But I think that
during General Burnside’s command of the army you have taken counsel of your ambition and thwarted him as
much as you could, in which you did a great wrong to the country and to a most meritorious and honorable
brother officer.
I have heard, in such a way as to believe it, of your recently saying that both the army and the
Government needed a dictator. Of course, it was not for this, but in spite of it, that I have given you command.
Only those generals who gain successes can set up as dictators. What I now ask of you is military
success and I will risk the dictatorship.
The Government will support you to the utmost of its ability, which is neither more nor less than it has
done and will do for all commanders. I much fear that the spirit which you have aided to infuse into the army, of
criticizing their commander and withholding confidence from him, will now turn upon you. I shall assist you, as
far as I can, to put it down.
Neither you nor Napoleon, if he were alive again, could get any good out of an army while such spirit
prevails in it, and now beware of rashness. Beware of rashness, but with energy and sleepless vigilance go
forward and give us victories.
You are not a Coolidge, a McKinley or a Lincoln. You want to know whether this philosophy will
operate for you in everyday business contacts. Will it? Let’s see. Let’s take the case of W. P. Gaw of the Wark
Company, Philadelphia.
The Wark Company had contracted to build and complete a large office building in Philadelphia by a
certain specified date. Everything was going along well; the building was almost finished, when suddenly the
sub-contractor making the ornamental bronze work to go on the exterior of this building declared that he
couldn’t make delivery on schedule. What! An entire building held up! Heavy penalties! Distressing losses! All
because of one man!
Long-distance telephone calls. Arguments! Heated conversations! All in vain. Then Mr. Gaw was sent
to New York to beard the bronze lion in his den.
“Do you know you are the only person in Brooklyn with your name?” Mr Gaw asked the president of
the subcontracting firm shortly after they were introduced. The president was surprised. “No, I didn’t know
that.”
“Well,” said Mr. Gaw, “when I got off the train this morning, I looked in the telephone book to get
your address, and you’re the only person in the Brooklyn phone book with your name.”
“I never knew that,” the subcontractor said. He checked the phone book with interest. “Well, it’s an
unusual name,” he said proudly. "My family came from Holland and settled in New York almost two hundred
years ago.” He continued to talk about his family and his ancestors for several minutes. When he finished that,
Mr. Gaw complimented him on how large a plant he had and compared it favorably with a number of similar
plants he had visited. “It is one of the cleanest and neatest bronze factories I ever saw,” said Gaw.
“I’ve spent a lifetime building up this business,” the subcontractor said, “and I am rather proud of it.
Would you like to take a look around the factory?”
During this tour of inspection, Mr. Gaw complimented the other man on his system of fabrication and
told him how and why it seemed superior to those of some of his competitors. Gaw commented on some
unusual machines, and the subcontractor announced that he himself had invented those machines. He spent
107
considerable time showing Gaw how they operated and the superior work they turned out. He insisted on taking
his visitor to lunch. So far, mind you, not a word had been said about the real purpose of Gaw’s visit.
After lunch, the subcontractor said, “Now, to get down to business. Naturally, I know why you’re here.
I didn’t expect that our meeting would be so enjoyable. You can go back to Philadelphia with my promise that
your material will be fabricated and shipped, even if other orders have to be delayed.”
Mr. Gaw got everything that he wanted without even asking for it. The material arrived on time, and
the building was completed on the day the completion contract specified.
Would this have happened had Mr. Gaw used the hammer-and-dynamite method generally employed
on such occasions?
Dorothy Wrublewski, a branch manager of the Fort Monmouth, New Jersey, Federal Credit Union,
reported to one of our classes how she was able to help one of her employees become more productive.
“We recently hired a young lady as a teller trainee. Her contact with our customers was very good. She
was accurate and efficient in handling individual transactions. The problem developed at the end of the day
when it was time to balance out.
“The head teller came to me and strongly suggested that I fire this woman. ‘She is holding up everyone
else because she is so slow in balancing out. I’ve shown her over and over, but she can’t get it. She’s got to go.’
“The next day I observed her working quickly and accurately when handling the normal everyday
transactions, and she was very pleasant with our customers.
“It didn’t take long to discover why she had trouble balancing out. After the office closed, I went over
to talk with her. She was obviously nervous and upset. I praised her for being so friendly and outgoing with the
customers and complimented her for the accuracy and speed used in that work. I then suggested we review the
procedure we use in balancing the cash drawer. Once she realized I had confidence in her, she easily followed
my suggestions and soon mastered this function. We have had no problems with her since then.”
Beginning with praise is like the dentist who begins his work with Novocain. The patient still gets a
drilling, but the Novocain is pain-killing. A leader will use…
PRINCIPLE 1
Begin with praise and honest appreciation.
108
23
“HOW TO CRITICIZE—AND NOT BE HATED FOR IT.”
Charles Schwab was passing through one of his steel mills one day at noon when he came across some
of his employees smoking. Immediately above their heads was a sign that said “No Smoking.” Did Schwab
point to the sign and say, “Can’t you read.? Oh no, not Schwab. He walked over to the men, handed each one a
cigar, and said, “I’ll appreciate it, boys, if you will smoke these on the outside.” They knew that he knew that
they had broken a rule—and they admired him because he said nothing about it and gave them a little present
and made them feel important. Couldn’t keep from loving a man like that, could you?
John Wanamaker used the same technique. Wanamaker used to make a tour of his great store in
Philadelphia every day. Once he saw a customer waiting at a counter. No one was paying the slightest attention
to her. The salespeople? Oh, they were in a huddle at the far end of the counter laughing and talking among
themselves. Wanamaker didn’t say a word. Quietly slipping behind the counter, he waited on the woman
himself and then handed the purchase to the salespeople to be wrapped as he went on his way.
Public officials are often criticized for not being accessible to their constituents. They are busy people,
and the fault sometimes lies in overprotective assistants who don’t want to overburden their bosses with too
many visitors. Carl Langford, who has been mayor of Orlando, Florida, the home of Disney World, for many
years, frequently admonished his staff to allow people to see him, claimed he had an “open-door” policy; yet the
citizens of his community were blocked by secretaries and administrators when they called.
Finally the mayor found the solution. He removed the door from his office! His aides got the message,
and the mayor has had a truly open administration since the day his door was symbolically thrown away.
Simply changing one three-letter word can often spell the difference between failure and success in
changing people without giving offense or arousing resentment.
Many people begin their criticism with sincere praise followed by the word “but” and ending with a
critical statement. For example, in trying to change a child’s careless attitude toward studies, we might say,
“We’re really proud of you, Johnnie, for raising your grades this term. But if you had worked harder on your
algebra, the results would have been better.”
In this case, Johnnie might feel encouraged until he heard the word “but”. He might then question the
sincerity of the original praise. To him, the praise seemed only to be a contrived lead-in to a critical inference of
failure. Credibility would be strained, and we probably would not achieve our objectives of changing Johnnie’s
attitude toward his studies.
This could be easily overcome by changing the word “but” to “and”. “We’re really proud of you,
Johnnie, for raising your grades this term, and by continuing the same conscientious efforts next term, your
algebra grade can be up with all the others.”
Now, Johnnie would accept the praise because there was no follow-up of an inference of failure. We
have called his attention to the behavior we wished to change indirectly and the chances are he will try to live up
to our expectations.
Calling attention to one’s mistakes indirectly works wonders with sensitive people who may resent
bitterly any direct criticism. Marge Jacob of Woonsocket, Rhode Island, told one of our classes how she
convinced some sloppy construction workers to clean up after themselves when they were building additions to
her house.
For the first few days of the work, when Mrs. Jacob returned from her job, she noticed that the yard
was strewn with the cut ends of lumber. She didn’t want to antagonize the builders, because they did excellent
work. So after the workers had gone home, she and her children picked up and neatly piled all the lumber debris
in a corner. The following morning she called the foreman to one side and said, “I’m really pleased with the way
109
the front lawn was left last night; it is nice and clean and does not offend the neighbors.” From that day forward
the workers picked up and piled the debris to one side, and the foreman came in each day seeking approval of
the condition the lawn was left in after a day’s work.
One of the major areas of controversy between members of the army reserves and their regular army
trainers is haircuts. The reservists consider themselves civilians (which they are most of the time) and resent
having to cut their hair short.
Master Sergeant Harley Kaiser of the 542nd USAR School addressed himself to this problem when he
was working with a group of reserve noncommissioned officers. As an old-time regular-army master sergeant,
he might have been expected to yell at his troops and threaten them. Instead he chose to make his point
indirectly.
“Gentlemen,” he started, “you are leaders. You will be most effective when you lead by example. You
must be the example for your men to follow. You know what the army regulations say about haircuts. I am
going to get my hair cut today, although it is still much shorter than some of yours. You look at yourself in the
mirror, and if you feel you need a haircut to be a good example, we’ll arrange time for you to visit the post
barbership.”
The result was predictable. Several of the candidates did look in the mirror and went to the barbershop
that afternoon and received “regulation” haircuts. Sergeant Kaiser commented the next morning that he already
could see the development of leadership qualities in some of the members of the squad.
On March 8, 1887, the eloquent Henry Ward Beecher died. The following Sunday, Lyman Abbott was
invited to speak in the pulpit left silent by Beecher’s passing. Eager to do his best, he wrote, rewrote and
polished his sermon with the meticulous care of a Flaubert. Then he read it to his wife. It was poor - as most
written speeches are. She might have said, if she had had less judgment, “Lyman, that is terrible. That’ll never
do. You’ll put people to sleep. It reads like an encyclopedia. You ought to know better than that after all the
years you have been preaching. For heaven’s sake, why don’t you talk like a human being? Why don’t you act
natural? You’ll disgrace yourself if you ever read that stuff.”
That’s what she might have said. And, if she had, you know what would have happened. And she knew
too. So, she merely remarked that it would make an excellent article for the North American Review. In other
words, she praised it and at the same time subtly suggested that it wouldn’t do as a speech. Lyman Abbott saw
the point, tore up his carefully prepared manuscript and preached without even using notes.
An effective way to correct others’ mistakes is…
PRINCIPLE 2
Call attention to people’s mistakes indirectly.
110
24
“TALK ABOUT YOUR OWN MISTAKES FIRST.”
My niece, Josephine Carnegie, had come to New York to be my secretary. She was nineteen, had
graduated from high school three years previously, and her business experience was a trifle more than zero. She
became one of the most proficient secretaries west of Suez, but in the beginning, she was—well, susceptible to
improvement. One day when I started to criticize her, I said to myself: “Just a minute, Dale Carnegie; just a
minute. You are twice as old as Josephine. You have had ten thousand times as much business experience. How
can you possibly expect her to have your viewpoint, your judgment, your initiative—mediocre though they may
be? And just a minute, Dale, what were you doing at nineteen? Remember the asinine mistakes and blunders
you made? Remember the time you did this…and that…?”
After thinking the matter over, honestly and impartially, I concluded that Josephine’s batting average at
nineteen was better than mine had been—and that, I’m sorry to confess, isn’t paying Josephine much of a
compliment.
So after that, when I wanted to call Josephine’s attention to a mistake, I used to begin by saying, “You
have made a mistake, Josephine, but the Lord knows, it’s no worse than many I have made. You were not born
with judgment. That comes only with experience, and you are better than I was at your age. I have been guilty of
so many stupid, silly things myself, I have very little inclination to criticize you or anyone. But don’t you think
it would have been wiser if you had done so and so?"
It isn’t nearly so difficult to listen to a recital of your faults if the person criticizing begins by humbly
admitting that he, too, is far from impeccable.
E. G. Dillistone, an engineer in Brandon, Manitoba, Canada, was having problems with his new
secretary. Letters he dictated were coming to his desk for signature with two or three spelling mistakes per page.
Mr. Dillistone reported how he handled this:
“Like many engineers, I have not been noted for my excellent English or spelling. For years I have kept
a little black thumb index book for words I had trouble spelling. When it became apparent that merely pointing
out the errors was not going to cause my secretary to do more proofreading and dictionary work, I resolved to
take another approach. When the next letter came to my attention that had errors in it, I sat down with the typist
and said:
“‘Somehow this word doesn’t look right. It’s one of the words I always have had trouble with. That’s
the reason I started this spelling book of mine. [I opened the book to the appropriate page.] Yes, here it is. I’m
very conscious of my spelling now because people do judge us by our letters and misspellings make us look less
professional.
“I don't know whether she copied my system or not, but since that conversation, her frequency of
spelling errors has been significantly reduced.”
The polished Prince Bernhard von Bülow learned the sharp necessity of doing this back in 1909. Von
Bülow was then the Imperial Chancellor of Germany, and on the throne sat Wilhelm II—Wilhelm, the haughty;
Wilhelm the arrogant; Wilhelm, the last of the German Kaisers, building an army and navy that he boasted
could whip their weight in wildcats.
Then an astonishing thing happened. The Kaiser said things, incredible things, things that rocked the
continent and started a series of explosions heard around the world. To make matters infinitely worse, the Kaiser
made silly, egotistical, absurd announcements in public, he made them while he was a guest in England, and he
gave his royal permission to have them printed in the Daily Telegraph. For example, he declared that he was the
only German who felt friendly toward the English; that he was constructing a navy against the menace of Japan;
that he, and he alone, had saved England from being humbled in the dust by Russia and France; that it had been
his campaign plan that enabled England’s Lord Roberts to defeat the Boers in South Africa; and so on and on.
111
No other such amazing words had ever fallen from the lips of a European king in peacetime within a
hundred years. The entire continent buzzed with the fury of a hornet’s nest. England was incensed. German
statesmen were aghast. And in the midst of all this consternation, the Kaiser became panicky and suggested to
Prince von Bülow, the Imperial Chancellor, that he take the blame. Yes, he wanted von Bülow to announce that
it was all his responsibility, that he had advised his monarch to say these incredible things.
“But Your Majesty,” von Bülow protested, “it seems to me utterly impossible that anybody either in
Germany or England could suppose me capable of having advised Your Majesty to say any such thing.”
The moment those words were out of von Bülow’s mouth, he realized he had made a grave mistake.
The Kaiser blew up.
“You consider me a donkey,” he shouted, “capable of blunders you yourself could never have
committed!”
Von Bülow's knew that he ought to have praised before he condemned; but since that was too late, he
did the next best thing. He praised after he had criticized. And it worked a miracle.
“I'm far from suggesting that,” he answered respectfully. “Your Majesty surpasses me in manv respects;
not only of course, in naval and military knowledge but above all, in natural science. I have often listened in
admiration when Your Majesty explained the barometer, or wireless telegraphy, or the Roentgen rays. I am
shamefully ignorant of all branches of natural science, have no notion of chemistry or physics, and am quite
incapable of explaining the simplest of natural phenomena. But,” von Büllow continued, “in compensation, I
possess some historical knowledge and perhaps certain qualities useful in politics, especially in diplomacy.”
The Kaiser beamed. Von Bulow had praised him. Von Bülow had exalted him and humbled himself.
The Kaiser could forgive anything after that. “Haven’t I always told you,” he exclaimed with enthusiasm, “that
we complete one another famously? We should stick together, and we will!”
He shook hands with von Bülow, not once, but several times. And later in the day he waxed so
enthusiastic that he exclaimed with doubled fists, “If anyone says anything to me against Prince von Bülow, I
shall punch him in the nose.”
Von Bülow saved himself in time—but, canny diplomat that he was, he nevertheless had made one
error: he should have begun by talking about his own shortcomings and Wilhelm’s superiority - not by
intimating that the Kaiser was a half-wit in need of a guardian.
If a few sentences humbling oneself and praising the other party can turn a haughty, insulted Kaiser
into a staunch friend, imagine what humility and praise can do for you and me in our daily contacts. Rightfully
used, they will work veritable miracles in human relations.
Admitting one’s own mistakes—even when one hasn’t corrected them—can help convince somebody
to change his behavior. This was illustrated more recently by Clarence Zerhusen of Timonium, Maryland, when
he discovered his fifteen-year-old son was experimenting with cigarettes.
“Naturally, I didn’t want David to smoke,” Mr. Zerhusen told us, “but his mother and I smoked
cigarettes; we were giving him a bad example all the time. I explained to Dave how I started smoking at about
his age and how the nicotine had gotten the best of me and now it was nearly impossible for me to stop. I
reminded him how irritating my cough was and how he had been after me to give up cigarettes not many years
before.
“I didn’t exhort him to stop or make threats or warn him about their dangers. All I did was point out
how I was hooked on cigarettes and what it had meant to me.
“He thought about it for a while and decided he wouldn’t smoke until he had graduated from high
school. As the years went by David never did start smoking and has no intention of ever doing so.
“As a result of that conversation I made the decision to stop smoking cigarettes myself, and with the
support of my family, I have succeeded.”
112
A good leader follows this principle:
PRINCIPLE 3
Talk about your own mistakes before criticizing the other person.
113
25
“NO ONE LIKES TO TAKE ORDERS.”
I once had the pleasure of dining with Miss Ida Tarbell, the dean of American biographers. When I told
her I was writing this book, we began discussing this all-important subject of getting along with people, and she
told me that while she was writing her biography of Owen D. Young, she interviewed a man who had sat for
three years in the same office with Mr. Young. This man declared that during all that time he had never heard
Owen D. Young give a direct order to anyone. He always gave suggestions, not orders. Owen D. Young never
said, for example, “Do this or do that,” or “Don’t do this or don’t do that.” He would say, “You might consider
this,” or “Do you think that would work?” Frequently he would say, after he had dictated a letter, “What do you
think of this?” In looking over a letter of one of his assistants, he would say, “Maybe if we were to phrase it this
way it would be better.” He always gave people the opportunity to do things themselves; he never told his
assistants to do things; he let them do them, let them learn from their mistakes.
A technique like that makes it easy for a person to correct errors. A technique like that saves a person’s
pride and gives him or her a feeling of importance. It encourages cooperation instead of rebellion.
Resentment caused by a brash order may last a long time—even if the order was given to correct an
obviously bad situation. Dan Santarelli, a teacher at a vocational school in Wyoming, Pennsylvania, told one of
our classes how one of his students had blocked the entrance way to one of the school’s shops by illegally
parking his car in it. One of the other instructors stormed into the classroom and asked in an arrogant tone,
“Whose car is blocking the driveway?” When the student who owned the car responded, the instructor screamed:
“Move that car and move it right now, or I’ll wrap a chain around it and drag it out of there.”
Now that student was wrong. The car should not have been parked there. But from that day on, not
only did that student resent the instructor’s action, but all the students in the class did everything they could to
give the instructor a hard time and make his job unpleasant.
How could he have handled it differently? If he had asked in a friendly way, “Whose car is in the
driveway?” and then suggested that if it were moved, other cars could get in and out, the student would have
gladly moved it and neither he nor his classmates would have been upset and resentful.
Asking questions not only makes an order more palatable; it often stimulates the creativity of the
persons whom you ask. People are more likely to accept an order if they have had a part in the decision that
caused the order to be issued.
When Ian Macdonald of Johannesburg, South Africa, the general manager of a small manufacturing
plant specializing in precision machine parts, had the opportunity to accept a very large order, he was convinced
that he would not meet the promised delivery date. The work already scheduled in the shop and the short
completion time needed for this order made it seem impossible for him to accept the order.
Instead of pushing his people to accelerate their work and rush the order through, he called everybody
together, explained the situation to them, and told them how much it would mean to the company and to them if
they could make it possible to produce the order on time. Then he started asking questions:
“Is there anything we can do to handle this order?”
“Can anyone think of different ways to process it through the shop that will make it possible to take the
order?”
“Is there any way to adjust our hours or personnel assignments that would help?”
The employees came up with many ideas and insisted that he take the order. They approached it with a
“We can do it” attitude, and the order was accepted, produced and delivered on time.
114
An effective leader will use…
PRINCIPLE 4
Ask questions instead of giving direct orders.
115
26
“LET THE OTHER PERSON SAVE FACE.”
Years ago the General Electric Company was faced with the delicate task of removing Charles
Steinmetz from the head of a department. Steinmetz, a genius of the first magnitude when it came to electricity,
was a failure as the head of the calculating department. Yet the company didn’t dare offend the man. He was
indispensable—and highly sensitive. So they gave him a new title. They made him Consulting Engineer of the
General Electric Company—a new title for work he was already doing—and let someone else head up the
department.
Steinmetz was happy.
So were the officers of G.E. They had gently maneuvered their most temperamental star, and they had
done it without a storm—by letting him save face.
Letting one save face! How important, how vitally important that is! And how few of us ever stop to
think of it! We ride roughshod over the feelings of others, getting our own way, finding fault, issuing threats,
criticizing a child or an employee in front of others, without even considering the hurt to the other person’s pride.
Whereas a few minutes’ thought, a considerate word or two, a genuine understanding of the other person’s
attitude, would go so far toward alleviating the sting!
Let’s remember that the next time we are faced with the distasteful necessity of discharging or
reprimanding an employee.
“Firing employees is not much fun. Getting fired is even less fun.” (I’m quoting now from a letter
written me by Marshall A. Granger, a certified public accountant.) “Our business is mostly seasonal. Therefore
we have to let a lot of people go after the income tax rush is over.
It’s a byword in our profession that no one enjoys wielding the ax. Consequently, the custom has
developed of getting it over as soon as possible, and usually in the following way: ‘Sit down, Mr. Smith. The
season’s over, and we don’t seem to see any more assignments for you. Of course, you understood you were
only employed for the busy season anyhow, etc., etc.’
“The effect on these people is one of disappointment and a feeling of being ‘let down.’ Most of them
are in the accounting field for life, and they retain no particular love for the firm that drops them so casually.
“I recently decided to let our seasonal personnel go with a little more tact and consideration. So I call
each one in only after carefully thinking over his or her work during the winter. And I’ve said something like
this: ‘Mr. Smith, you’ve done a fine job (if he has). That time we sent you to Newark, you had a tough
assignment. You were on the spot, but you came through with flying colors, and we want you to know the firm
is proud of you. You’ve got the stuff—you’re going a long way, wherever you’re working. This firm believes in
you, and is rooting for you, and we don’t want you to forget it.’
“Effect? The people go away feeling a lot better about being fired. They don’t feel ‘let down.’ They
know if we had work for them, we’d keep them on. And when we need them again, they come to us with a keen
personal affection.”
At one session of our course, two class members discussed the negative effects of faultfinding versus
the positive effects of letting the other person save face.
Fred Clark of Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, told of an incident that occurred in his company: “At one of
our production meetings, a vice president was asking very pointed questions of one of our production
supervisors regarding a production process. His tone of voice was aggressive and aimed at pointing out faulty
performance on the part of the supervisor. Not wanting to be embarrassed in front of his peers, the supervisor
116
was evasive in his responses. This caused the vice president to lose his temper, berate the supervisor and accuse
him of lying.
“Any working relationship that might have existed prior to this encounter was destroyed in a few brief
moments. This supervisor, who was basically a good worker, was useless to our company from that time on. A
few months later he left our firm and went to work for a competitor, where I understand he is doing a fine job.”
Another class member, Anna Mazzone, related how a similar incident had occurred at her job - but
what a difference in approach and results! Ms. Mazzone, a marketing specialist for a food packer, was given her
first major assignment—the test-marketing of a new product. She told the class: “When the results of the test
came in, I was devastated. I had made a serious error in my planning, and the entire test had to be done all over
again. To make this worse, I had no time to discuss it with my boss before the meeting in which I was to make
my report on the project.
“When I was called on to give the report, I was shaking with fright. I had all I could do to keep from
breaking down, but I resolved I would not cry and have all those men make remarks about women not being
able to handle a management job because they are too emotional. I made my report briefly and stated that due to
an error I would repeat the study before the next meeting. I sat down, expecting my boss to blow up.
“Instead, he thanked me for my work and remarked that it was not unusual for a person to make an
error on a new project and that he had confidence that the repeat survey would be accurate and meaningful to
the company. He assured me, in front of all my colleagues, that he had faith in me and I knew I had done my
best, and that my lack of experience, not my lack of ability, was the reason for the failure.
I left that meeting with my head in the air and with the determination that I would never let that boss of
mine down again.”
Even if we are right and the other person is definitely wrong, we only destroy ego by causing someone
to lose face. The legendary French aviation pioneer and author Antoine de Saint-Exupéry wrote: "I have no right
to say or do anything that diminishes a man in his own eyes. What matters is not what I think of him, but what
he thinks of himself. Hurting a man in his dignity is a crime.”
A real leader will always follow…
PRINCIPLE 5
Let the other person save face.
117
27
“HOW TO SPUR PEOPLE ON TO SUCCESS.”
Pete Barlow was an old friend of mine. He had a dog-and-pony act and spent his life traveling with
circuses and vaudeville shows. I loved to watch Pete train new dogs for his act. I noticed that the moment a dog
showed the slightest improvement, Pete patted and praised him and gave him meat and made a great to-do about
it.
That’s nothing new. Animal trainers have been using that same technique for centuries.
Why, I wonder, don’t we use the same common sense when trying to change people that we use when
trying to change dogs? Why don’t we use meat instead of a whip? Why don’t we use praise instead of
condemnation? Let us praise even the slightest improvement. That inspires the other person to keep on
improving.
In his book I Ain’t Much, Baby—But I’m All I Got, the psychologist Jess Lair comments, “Praise is like
sunlight to the warm human spirit; we cannot flower and grow without it. And yet, while most of us are only too
ready to apply to others the cold wind of criticism, we are somehow reluctant to give our fellow the warm
sunshine of praise.” *
* Jess Lair, I Ain’t Much, Baby—But I’m All I Got (Greenwich, Conn.: Fawcett, 1976), p . 248.
I can look back at my own life and see where a few words of praise have sharply changed my entire
future. Can’t you say the same thing about your life? History is replete with striking illustrations of the sheer
witchery raise.
For example, many years ago a boy of ten was working in a factory in Naples, He longed to be a singer,
but his first teacher discouraged him. “You can’t sing,” he said. “You haven’t any voice at all. It sounds like the
wind in the shutters.”
But his mother, a poor peasant woman, put her arms about him and praised him and told him she knew
he could sing, she could already see an improvement, and she went barefoot in order to save money to pay for
his music lessons. That peasant mother’s praise and encouragement changed that boy’s life. His name was
Enrico Caruso, and he became the greatest and most famous opera singer of his age.
In the early nineteenth century, a young man in London aspired to be a writer. But everything seemed
to be against him. He had never been able to attend school more than four years. His father had been flung in jail
because he couldn’t pay his debts, and this young man often knew the pangs of hunger. Finally, he got a job
pasting labels on bottles of blacking in a rat-infested warehouse, and he slept at night in a dismal attic room with
two other boys—guttersnipes from the slums of London. He had so little confidence in his ability to write that
he sneaked out and mailed his first manuscript in the dead of night so nobody would laugh at him. Story after
story was refused. Finally the great day came when one was accepted. True, he wasn’t paid a shilling for it, but
one editor had praised him. One editor had given him recognition. He was so thrilled that he wandered aimlessly
around the streets with tears rolling down his cheeks.
The praise, the recognition, that he received through getting one story in print, changed his whole life,
for if it hadn’t been for that encouragement, he might have spent his entire life working in rat-infested factories.
You may have heard of that boy. His name was Charles Dickens.
Another boy in London made his living as a clerk in a dry-goods store. He had to get up at five o’clock,
sweep out the store, and slave for fourteen hours a day. It was sheer drudgery and he despised it. After two years,
he could stand it no longer, so he got up one morning and, without waiting for breakfast, tramped fifteen miles
to talk to his mother, who was working as a housekeeper.
He was frantic. He pleaded with her. He wept. He swore he would kill himself if he had to remain in
the shop any longer. Then he wrote a long, pathetic letter to his old schoolmaster, declaring that he was
118
heartbroken, that he no longer wanted to live. His old schoolmaster gave him a little praise and assured him that
he really was very intelligent and fitted for finer things and offered him a job as a teacher.
That praise changed the future of that boy and made a lasting impression on the history of English
literature. For that boy went on to write innumerable best-selling books and made over a million dollars with his
pen. You’ve probably heard of him. His name: H. G. Wells.
Use of praise instead of criticism is the basic concept of B. F. Skinner’s teachings. This great
contemporary psychologist has shown by experiments with animals and with humans that when criticism is
minimized and praise emphasized, the good things people do will be reinforced and the poorer things will
atrophy for lack of attention.
John Ringelspaugh of Rocky Mount, North Carolina, used this in dealing with his children. It seemed
that, as in so many families, mother and dad’s chief form of communication with the children was yelling at
them. And, as in so many cases, the children became a little worse rather than better after each such session -
and so did the parents. There seemed to be no end in sight for this problem.
Mr. Ringelspaugh determined to use some of the principles he was learning in our course to solve this
situation. He reported, “We decided to try praise instead of harping on their faults. It wasn’t easy when all we
could see were the negative things they were doing; it was really tough to find things to praise. We managed to
find something, and within the first day or two some of the really upsetting things they were doing quit
happening. Then some of their other faults began to disappear. They began capitalizing on the praise we were
giving them. They even began going out of their way to do things right. Neither of us could believe it. Of course,
it didn’t last forever, but the norm reached after things leveled off was so much better. It was no longer
necessary to react the way we used to. The children were doing far more right things than wrong ones.” All of
this was a result of praising the slightest improvement in the children rather than condemning everything they
did wrong.
This works on the job too. Keith Roper of Woodland Hills, California, applied this principle to a
situation in his company. Some material came to him in his print shop which was of exceptionally high quality.
The printer who had done this job was a new employee who had been having difficulty adjusting to the job. His
supervisor was upset about what he considered a negative attitude and was seriously thinking of terminating his
services.
When Mr. Roper was informed of this situation, he personally went over to the print shop and had a
talk with the young man. He told him how pleased he was with the work he had just received and pointed out it
was the best work he had seen produced in that shop for some time. He pointed out exactly why it was superior
and how important the young man’s contribution was to the company,
Do you think this affected that young printer’s attitude toward the company? Within days there was a
complete turnabout. He told several of his co-workers about the conversation and how someone in the company
really appreciated good work. And from that day on, he was a loyal and dedicated worker.
What Mr. Roper did was not just flatter the young printer and say, “You’re good.” He specifically
pointed out how his work was superior. Because he had singled out a specific accomplishment, rather than just
making general flattering remarks, his praise became much more meaningful to the person to whom it was given.
Everybody likes to be praised, but when praise is specific, it comes across as sincere—not something the other
person may be saying just to make one feel good.
Remember, we all crave appreciation and recognition, and will do almost anything to get it. But
nobody wants insincerity. Nobody wants flattery.
Let me repeat: The principles taught in this book will work only when they come from the heart. I am
not advocating a bag of tricks. I am talking about a new way of life.
Talk about changing people. If you and I will inspire the people with whom we come in contact to a
realization of the hidden treasures they possess, we can do far more than change people. We can literally
transform them.
119
Exaggeration? Then listen to these sage words from William James, one of the most distinguished
psychologists and philosophers America has ever produced: “Compared with what we ought to be, we are only
half awake. We are making use of only a small part of our physical and mental resources. Stating the thing
broadly, the human individual thus lives far within his limits. He possesses powers of various sorts which he
habitually fails to use.”
Yes, you who are reading these lines possess powers of various sorts which you habitually fail to use;
and one of these powers you are probably not using to the fullest extent is your magic ability to praise people
and inspire them with a realization of their latent possibilities.
Abilities wither under criticism; they blossom under encouragement. To become a more effective
leader of people, apply…
PRINCIPLE 6
Praise the slightest improvement and praise every improvement. Be “hearty in your approbation and lavish
in your praise.”
120
28
“GIVE A DOG A GOOD NAME.”
What do you do when a person who has been a good worker begins to turn in shoddy work? You can
fire him or her, but that really doesn’t solve anything. You can berate the worker, but this usually causes
resentment. Henry Henke, a service manager for a large truck dealership in Lowell, Indiana, had a mechanic
whose work had become less than satisfactory. Instead of bawling him out or threatening him, Mr. Henke called
him into his office and had a heart-to-heart talk with him.
“Bill,” he said, “you are a fine mechanic. You have been in this line of work for a good number of
years. You have repaired many vehicles to the customers’ satisfaction. In fact, we’ve had a number of
compliments about the good work you have done. Yet, of late, the time you take to complete each job has been
increasing and your work has not been up to your own old standards. Because you have been such an
outstanding mechanic in the past, I felt sure you would want to know that I am not happy with this situation, and
perhaps jointly we could find some way to correct the problem.”
Bill responded that he hadn’t realized he had been falling down in his duties and assured his boss that
the work he was getting was not out of his range of expertise and he would try to improve in the future.
Did he do it? You can be sure he did. He once again became a fast and thorough mechanic. With that
reputation Mr. Henke had given him to live up to, how could he do anything else but turn out work comparable
to that which he had done in the past.
“The average person,” said Samuel Vauclain, then president of the Baldwin Locomotive Works, "can
be led readily if you have his or her respect and if you show that you respect that person for some kind of
ability.”
In short, if you want to improve a person in a certain aspect, act as though that particular trait were
already one of his or her outstanding characteristics. Shakespeare said, “Assume a virtue, if you have it not.”
And it might be well to assume and state openly that other people have the virtue you want them to develop.
Give them a fine reputation to live up to, and they will make prodigious efforts rather than see you disillusioned.
Georgette Leblanc, in her book Souvenirs, My Life with Maeterlinck, describes the startling
transformation of a humble Belgian Cinderella.
 “A servant girl from a neighboring hotel brought my meals,” she wrote. “She was called ‘Marie the
Dishwasher’ because she had started her career as a scullery assistant. She was a kind of monster, cross-eyed,
bandylegged, poor in flesh and spirit.
 “One day, while she was holding my plate of macaroni in her red hand, I said to her point-blank,
‘Marie, you do not know what treasures are within you.’
“Accustomed to holding back her emotion, Marie waited a few moments, not daring to risk the
slightest gesture for fear of a castastrophe. Then she put the dish on the table, sighed and said ingenuously,
‘Madame, I would never have believed it.’ She did not doubt, she did not ask a question. She simply went back
to the kitchen and repeated what I had said, and such is the force of faith that no one made fun of her. From that
day on, she was even given a certain consideration. But the most curious change of all occurred in the humble
Marie herself. Believing she was the tabernacle of unseen marvels, she began taking care of her face and body
so carefully that her starved youth seemed to bloom and modestly hide her plainness.
“Two months later, she announced her coming marriage with the nephew of the chef. ‘I’m going to be
a lady,’ she said, and thanked me. A small phrase had changed her entire life.”
Georgette Leblanc had given “Marie the Dishwasher” a reputation to live up to—and that reputation
had transformed her.
121
Bill Parker, a sales representative for a food company in Daytona Beach, Florida, was very excited
about the new line of products his company was introducing and was upset when the manager of a large
independent food market turned down the opportunity to carry it in his store. Bill brooded all day over this
rejection and decided to return to the store before he went home that evening and try again.
“Jack,” he said, “since I left this morning I realized I hadn’t given you the entire picture of our new line,
and I would appreciate some of your time to tell you about the points I omitted. I have respected the fact that
you are always willing to listen and are big enough to change your mind when the facts warrant a change.”
Could Jack refuse to give him another hearing? Not with that reputation to live up to.
One morning Dr. Martin Fitzhugh, a dentist in Dublin, Ireland, was shocked when one of his patients
pointed out to him that the metal cup holder which she was using to rinse her mouth was not very clean. True,
the patient drank from the paper cup, not the holder, but it certainly was not professional to use tarnished
equipment.
When the patient left, Dr. Fitzhugh retreated to his private office to write a note to Bridgit, the
charwoman, who came twice a week to clean his office. He wrote:
“My dear Bridgit,
“I see you so seldom, I thought I’d take the time to thank you for the fine job of cleaning you’ve been
doing. By the way, I thought I’d mention that since two hours, twice a week, is a very limited amount of time,
please feel free to work an extra half hour from time to time if you feel you need to do those ‘once-in-a-while’
things like polishing the cup holders and the like. I, of course, will pay you for the extra time.”
“The next day, when I walked into my office,” Dr. Fitzhugh reported, “My desk had been polished to a
mirror-like finish, as had my chair, which I nearly slid out of. When I went into the treatment room I found the
shiniest, cleanest chrome-plated cup holder I had ever seen nestled in its receptacle. I had given my charwoman
a fine reputation to live up to, and because of this small gesture she outperformed all her past efforts. How much
additional time did she spend on this? That’s right—none at all.”
There is an old saying: “Give a dog a bad name and you may as well hang him.” But give him a good
name—and see what happens!
When Mrs. Ruth Hopkins, a fourth-grade teacher in Brooklyn, New York, looked at her class roster the
first day of school, her excitement and joy of starting a new term was tinged with anxiety. In her class this year
she would have Tommy T., the school’s most notorious “bad boy”. His third-grade teacher had constantly
complained about Tommy to colleagues, the principal and anyone else who would listen. He was not just
mischievous; he caused serious discipline problems in the class, picked fights with the boys, teased the girls,
was fresh to the teacher, and seemed to get worse as he grew older. His only redeeming feature was his ability to
learn rapidly and master the-school work easily.
Mrs. Hopkins decided to face the “Tommy problem” immediately. When she greeted her new students,
she made little comments to each of them: “Rose, that’s a pretty dress you are wearing,” “Alicia, I hear you
draw beautifully.” When she came to Tommy, she looked him straight in the eyes and said, “Tommy, I
understand you are a natural leader. I’m going to depend on you to help me make this class the best class in the
fourth grade this year.” She reinforced this over the first few days by complimenting Tommy on everything he
did and commenting on how this showed what a good student he was. With that reputation to live up to, even a
nine-year-old couldn’t let her down—and he didn’t.
If you want to excel in that difficult leadership role of changing the attitude or behavior of others,
use…
PRINCIPLE 7
Give the other person a fine reputation to live up to.
122
29
“MAKE THE FAULT SEEM EASY TO CORRECT.”
A bachelor friend of mine, about forty years old, became engaged, and his fiancée persuaded him to
take some belated dancing lessons. “The Lord knows I needed dancing lessons,” he confessed as he told me the
story, “for I danced just as I did when I first started twenty years ago. The first teacher I engaged probably told
me the truth. She said I was all wrong; I would just have to forget everything and begin all over again. But that
took the heart out of me. I had no incentive to go on. So I quit her.
“The next teacher may have been lying, but I liked it. She said nonchalantly that my dancing was a bit
old-fashioned perhaps, but the fundamentals were all right, and she assured me I wouldn’t have any trouble
learning a few new steps. The first teacher had discouraged me by emphasizing my mistakes. This new teacher
did the opposite. She kept praising the things I did right and minimizing my errors. ‘You have a natural sense of
rhythm,’ she assured me. ‘You really are a natural-born dancer.’ Now my common sense tells me that I always
have been and always will be a fourth-rate dancer; yet, deep in my heart, I still like to think that maybe she
meant it. To be sure, I was paying her to say it; but why bring that up?
“At any rate, I know I am a better dancer than I would have been if she hadn’t told me I had a natural
sense of rhythm. That encouraged me. That gave me hope. That made me want to improve.”
Tell your child, your spouse, or your employee that he or she is stupid or dumb at a certain thing, has
no gift for it, and is doing it all wrong, and you have destroyed almost every incentive to try to improve. But use
the opposite technique—be liberal with your encouragement, make the thing seem easy to do, let the other
person know that you have faith in his ability to do it, that he has an undeveloped flair for it - and he will
practice until the dawn comes in the window in order to excel.
Lowell Thomas, a superb artist in human relations, used this technique, He gave you confidence,
inspired you with courage and faith. For example, I spent a weekend with Mr. and Mrs. Thomas; and on
Saturday night, I was asked to sit in on a friendly bridge game before a roaring fire. Bridge? Oh, no! No! No!
Not me. I knew nothing about it. The game had always been a black mystery to me, No! No! Impossible!
“Why, Dale, it is no trick at all,” Lowell replied. “There is nothing to bridge except memory and
judgment. You’ve written articles on memory. Bridge will be a cinch for you. It’s right up your alley.”
And presto, almost before I realized what I was doing, I found myself for the first time at a bridge table.
All because I was told I had a natural flair for it and the game was made to seem easy.
Speaking of bridge reminds me of Ely Culbertson, whose books on bridge have been translated into a
dozen languages and have sold more than a million copies. Yet he told me he never would have made a
profession out of the game if a certain young woman hadn’t assured him he had a flair for it.
When he came to America in 1922, he tried to get a job teaching in philosophy and sociology, but he
couldn’t. Then he tried selling coal, and he failed at that
Then he tried selling coffee, and he failed at that, too.
He had played some bridge, but it had never occurred to him in those days that someday he would
teach it. He was not only a poor card player, but he was also very stubborn. He asked so many questions and
held so many post-mortem examinations that no one wanted to play with him.
Then he met a pretty bridge teacher, Josephine Dillon, fell in love and married her. She noticed how
carefully he analyzed his cards and persuaded him that he was a potential genius at the card table. It was that
encouragement and that alone, Culbertson told me, that caused him to make a profession of bridge.
123
Clarence M. Jones, one of the instructors of our course in Cincinnati, Ohio, told how encouragement
and making faults seem easy to correct completely changed the life of his son.
“In 1970 my son David, who was then fifteen years old, came to live with me in Cincinnati. He had led
a rough life. In 1958 his head was cut open in a car accident, leaving a very bad scar on his forehead. In 1960 his
mother and I were divorced and he moved to Dallas, Texas, with his mother. Until he was fifteen he had spent
most of his school years in special classes for slow learners in the Dallas school system. Possibly because of the
scar, school administrators had decided he was brain-injured and could not function at a normal level. He was
two years behind his age group, so he was only in the seventh grade. Yet he did not know his multiplication
tables, added on his fingers and could barely read.
“There was one positive point. He loved to work on radio and TV sets. He wanted to become a TV
technician. I encouraged this and pointed out that he needed math to qualify for the training. I decided to help
him become proficient in this subject. We obtained four sets of flash cards: multiplication, division, addition and
subtraction. As we went through the cards, we put the correct answers in a discard stack. When David missed
one, I gave him the correct answer and then put the card in the repeat stack until there were no cards left. I made
a big deal out of each card he got right, particularly if he had missed it previously. Each night we would go
through the repeat stack until there were no cards left.
Each night we timed the exercise with a stopwatch. I promised him that when he could get all the cards
correct in eight minutes with no incorrect answers, we would quit doing it every night. This seemed an
impossible goal to David. The first night it took 52 minutes, the second night, 48, then 45, 44, 41 then under 40
minutes. We celebrated each reduction. I’d call in my wife, and we would both hug him and we’d all dance a jig.
At the end of the month he was doing all the cards perfectly in less than eight minutes. When he made a small
improvement he would ask to do it again. He had made the fantastic discovery that learning was easy and fun.
“Naturally his grades in algebra took a jump. It is amazing how much easier algebra is when you can
multiply. He astonished himself by bringing home a B in math. That had never happened before. Other changes
came with almost unbelievable rapidity. His reading improved rapidly, and he began to use his natural talents in
drawing. Later in the school year his science teacher assigned him to develop an exhibit. He chose to develop a
highly complex series of models to demonstrate the effect of levers. It required skill not only in drawing and
model making but in applied mathematics. The exhibit took first prize in his school’s science fair and was
entered in the city competition and won third prize for the entire city of Cincinnati.
“That did it. Here was a kid who had flunked two grades, who had been told he was ‘brain-damaged,’
who had been called ‘Frankenstein’ by his classmates and told his brains must have leaked out of the cut on his
head. Suddenly he discovered he could really learn and accomplish things. The result? From the last quarter of
the eighth grade all the way through high school, he never failed to make the honor roll; in high school he was
elected to the national honor society. Once he found learning was easy, his whole life changed.”
If you want to help others to improve, remember…
PRINCIPLE 8
Use encouragement. Make the fault seem easy to correct.
124
30
“MAKING PEOPLE GLAD TO DO WHAT YOU WANT.”
Back in 1915, America was aghast. For more than a year, the nations of Europe had been slaughtering
one another on a scale never before dreamed of in all the bloody annals of mankind. Could peace be brought
about? No one knew. But Woodrow Wilson was determined to try. He would send a personal representative, a
peace emissary, to counsel with the warlords of Europe.
William Jennings Bryan, secretary of state, Bryan, the peace advocate, longed to go. He saw a chance
to perform a great service and make his name immortal. But Wilson appointed another man, his intimate friend
and advisor Colonel Edward M. House; and it was House’s thorny task to break the unwelcome news to Bryan
without giving him offense.
“Bryan was distinctly disappointed when he heard I was to go to Europe as the peace emissary,”
Colonel House records in his diary. “He said he had planned to do this himself…
“I replied that the President thought it would be unwise for anyone to do this officially, and that his
going would attract a great deal of attention and people would wonder why he was there…”
You see the intimation? House practically told Bryan that he was too important for the job—and Bryan
was satisfied.
Colonel House, adroit, experienced in the ways of the world, was following one of the important rules
of human relations: Always make the other person happy about doing the thing you suggest.
Woodrow Wilson followed that policy even when inviting William Gibbs McAdoo to become a
member of his cabinet. That was the highest honor he could confer upon anyone, and yet Wilson extended the
invitation in such a way as to make McAdoo feel doubly important. Here is the story in McAdoo's own words:
“He [Wilson] said that he was making up his cabinet and that he would be very glad if I would accept a place in
it as Secretary of the Treasury. He had a delightful way of putting things; he created the impression that by
accepting this great honor I would be doing him a favor.”
Unfortunately, Wilson didn’t always employ such taut. If he had, history might have been different. For
example, Wilson didn’t make the Senate and the Republican Party happy by entering the United States in the
League of Nations. Wilson refused to take such prominent Republican leaders as Elihu Root or Charles Evans
Hughes or Henry Cabot Lodge to the peace conference with him. Instead, he took along unknown men from his
own party. He snubbed the Republicans, refused to let them feel that the League was their idea as well as his,
refused to let them have a finger in the pie; and, as a result of this crude handling of human relations, wrecked
his own career, ruined his health, shortened his life, caused America to stay out of the League, and altered the
history of the world.
Statesmen and diplomats aren’t the only ones who use this make-a-person-happy-yo-do-things-youwant-them-to-do approach. Dale O. Ferrier of Fort Wayne, Indiana, told how he encouraged one of his young
children to willingly do the chore he was assigned.
“One of Jeff’s chores was to pick up pears from under the pear tree so the person who was mowing
underneath wouldn’t have to stop to pick them up. He didn’t like this chore, and frequently it was either not
done at all or it was done so poorly that the mower had to stop and pick up several pears that he had missed.
Rather than have an eyeball-to-eyeball confrontation about it, one day I said to him, ‘Jeff, I’ll make a deal with
you. For every bushel basket full of pears you pick up, I’ll pay you one dollar. But after you are finished, for
every pear I find left in the yard, I’ll take away a dollar. How does that sound?’ As you would expect, he not
only picked up all of the pears, but I had to keep an eye on him to see that he didn’t pull a few off the trees to fill
up some of the baskets.”
125
I knew a man who had to refuse many invitations to speak, invitations extended by friends, invitations
coming from people to whom he was obligated; and yet he did it so adroitly that the other person was at least
contented with his refusal. How did he do it? Not by merely talking about the fact that he was too busy and toothis and too-that. No, after expressing his appreciation of the invitation and regretting his inability to accept it,
he suggested a substitute speaker. In other words, he didn’t give the other person any time to feel unhappy about
the refusal, He immediately changed the other person’s thoughts to some other speaker who could accept the
invitation.
Gunter Schmidt, who took our course in West Germany, told of an employee in the food store he
managed who was negligent about putting the proper price tags on the shelves where the items were displayed.
This caused confusion and customer complaints. Reminders, admonitions, confrontations, with her about this
did not do much good. Finally, Mr. Schmidt called her into his office and told her he was appointing her
Supervisor of Price Tag Posting for the entire store and she would be responsible for keeping all of the shelves
properly tagged. This new responsibility and title changed her attitude completely, and she fulfiled her duties
satisfactorily from then on.
Childish? Perhaps. But that is what they said to Napoleon when he created the Legion of Honor and
distributed 15,000 crosses to his soldiers and made eighteen of his generals “Marshals of France” and called his
troops the “Grand Army.” Napoleon was criticized for giving “toys” to war-hardened veterans, and Napoleon
replied, “Men are ruled by toys.”
This technique of giving titles and authority worked for Napoleon and it will work for you. For
example, a friend of mine, Mrs. Ernest Gent of Scarsdale, New York, was troubled by boys running across and
destroying her lawn. She tried criticism. She tried coaxing. Neither worked. Then she tried giving the worst
sinner in the gang a title and a feeling of authority. She made him her “detective” and put him in charge of
keeping all trespassers off her lawn. That solved her problem. Her “detective” built a bonfire in the backyard,
heated an iron red hot, and threatened to brand any boy who stepped on the lawn.
The effective leader should keep the following guidelines in mind when it is necessary to change
attitudes or behavior:
1. Be sincere. Do not promise anything that you cannot deliver. Forget about the benefits to yourself and
concentrate on the benefits to the other person.
2. Know exactly what it is you want the other person to do.
3. Be empathetic. Ask yourself what is it the other person really wants.
4. Consider the benefits that person will receive from doing what you suggest.
5. Match those benefits to the other person’s wants.
6. When you make your request, put it in a form that will convey to the other person the idea that he
personally will benefit. We could give a curt order like this: “John, we have customers coming in tomorrow
and I need the stockroom cleaned out. So sweep it out, put the stock in neat piles on the shelves and polish
the counter.” Or we could express the same idea by showing John the benefits he will get from doing the
task: “John, we have a job that should be completed right away. If it is done now, we won’t be faced with it
later. I am bringing some customers in tomorrow to show our facilities. I would like to show them the
stockroom, but it is in poor shape. If you could sweep it out, put the stock in neat piles on the shelves, and
polish the counter, it would make us look efficient and you will have done your part to provide a good
company image.”
Will John be happy about doing what you suggest? Probably not very happy, but happier than if you
had not pointed out the benefits. Assuming you know that John has pride in the way his stockroom looks and is
interested in contributing to the company image, he will be more likely to be cooperative. It also will have been
pointed out to John that the job would have to be done eventually and by doing it now, he won’t be faced with it
later.
It is naive to believe you will always get a favorable reaction from other persons when you use these
approaches, but the experience of most people shows that you are more likely to change attitudes this way than
126
by not using these principles—and if you increase your successes by even a mere 10 percent, you have become
10 percent more effective as a leader than you were before—and that is your benefit.
People are more likely to do what you would like them to do when you use…
PRINCIPLE 9
Make the other person happy about doing the thing you suggest.
In a Nutshell
BE A LEADER
A leader’s job often includes changing your people’s attitudes and behavior. Some suggestions to
accomplish this:
PRINCIPLE 1
Begin with praise and honest appreciation.
PRINCIPLE 2
Call attention to people’s mistakes indirectly.
PRINCIPLE 3
Talk about your own mistakes before criticizing the other person.
PRINCIPLE 4
Ask questions instead of giving direct orders.
PRINCIPLE 5
Let the other person save face.
PRINCIPLE 6
Praise the slightest improvement and praise every improvement. Be “hearty in your approbation and
lavish in your praise.”
PRINCIPLE 7
Give the other person a fine reputation to live up to.
PRINCIPLE 8
Use encouragement. Make the fault seem easy to correct.
PRINCIPLE 9
Make the other person happy about doing the thing you suggest.
127
“A Shortcut To Distinction”
by Lowell Thomas
This biographical information about Dale Carnegie was written as an introduction to the original edition of
How to Win Friends and Influence People. It is reprinted in this edition to give the readers additional
background on Dale Carnegie.
It was a cold January night in 1935, but the weather couldn’t keep them away. Two thousand five
hundred men and women thronged into the grand ballroom of the Hotel Pennsylvania in New York. Every
available seat was filled by half-past seven. At eight o’clock, the eager crowd was still pouring in. The spacious
balcony was soon jammed. Presently even standing space was at a premium, and hundreds of people, tired after
navigating a day in business, stood up for an hour and a half that night to witness—what?
A fashion show?
A six-day bicycle race or a personal appearance by Clark Gable?
No. These people had been lured there by a newspaper ad. Two evenings previously, they had seen this
full-page announcement in the New York Sun staring them in the face:
Learn to Speak Effectively Prepare for Leadership
Old stuff? Yes, but believe it or not, in the most sophisticated town on earth, during a depression with
20 percent of the population on relief, twenty-five hundred people had left their homes and hustled to the hotel
in response to that ad.
The people who responded were of the upper economic strata—executives, employers and
professionals.
These men and women had come to hear the opening gun of an ultramodern, ultrapractical course in
“Effective Speaking and Influencing Men in Business”—a course given by the Dale Carnegie Institute of
Effective Speaking and Human Relations.
Why were they there, these twenty-five hundred business men and women?
Because of a sudden hunger for more education because of the depression?
Apparently not, for this same course had been playing to packed houses in New York City every season
for the preceding twenty-four years. During that time, more than fifteen thousand business and professional
people had been trained by Dale Carnegie. Even large, skeptical, conservative organizations such as the
Westinghouse Electric Company, the McGraw-Hill Publishing Company, the Brooklyn Union Gas Company,
the Brooklyn Chamber of Commerce, the American Institute of Electrical Engineers and the New York
Telephone Company have had this training conducted in their own offices for the benefit of their members and
executives.
The fact that these people, ten or twenty years after leaving grade school, high school or college, come
and take this training is a glaring commentary on the shocking deficiencies of our educational system.
What do adults really want to study? That is an important question; and in order to answer it, the
University of Chicago, the American Association for Adult Education, and the United Y.M.C.A. Schools made
a survey over a two-year period.
That survey revealed that the prime interest of adults is health. It also revealed that their second interest
is in developing skill in human relationships—they want to learn the technique of getting along with and
influencing other people. They don’t want to become public speakers, and they don’t want to listen to a lot of
high-sounding talk about psychology; they want suggestions they can use immediately in business, in social
contacts and in the home.
128
So that was what adults wanted to study, was it?
“All right,” said the people making the survey. “Fine. If that is what they want, we’ll give it to them.”
Looking around for a textbook, they discovered that no working manual had ever been written to help
people solve their daily problems in human relationships.
Here was a fine kettle of fish! For hundreds of years, learned volumes had been written on Greek and
Latin and higher mathematics—topics about which the average adult doesn’t give two hoots. But on the one
subject on which he has a thirst for knowledge, a veritable passion for guidance and help—nothing!
This explained the presence of twenty-five hundred eager adults crowding into the grand ballroom of
the Hotel Pennsylvania in response to a newspaper advertisement. Here, apparently, at last was the thing for
which they had long been seeking.
Back in high school and college, they had pored over books, believing that knowledge alone was the
open sesame to financial—and professional rewards.
But a few years in the rough-and-tumble of business and professional life had brought sharp
disillusionment. They had seen some of the most important business successes won by men who possessed, in
addition to their knowledge, the ability to talk well, to win people to their way of thinking, and to "sell"
themselves and their ideas.
They soon discovered that if one aspired to wear the captain’s cap and navigate the ship of business,
personality and the ability to talk are more important than a knowledge of Latin verbs or a sheepskin from
Harvard.
The advertisement in the New York Sun promised that the meeting would be highly entertaining. It was.
Eighteen people who had taken the course were marshaled in front of the loudspeaker—and fifteen of them were
given precisely seventy-five seconds each to tell his or her story. Only seventy-five seconds of talk, then “bang”
went the gavel, and the chairman shouted, “Time! Next speaker!”
The affair moved with the speed of a herd of buffalo thundering across the plains. Spectators stood for
an hour and a half to watch the performance.
The speakers were a cross section of life: several sales representatives, a chain store executive, a baker,
the president of a trade association, two bankers, an insurance agent, an accountant, a dentist, an architect, a
druggist who had come from Indianapolis to New York to take the course, a lawyer who had come from Havana
in order to prepare himself to give one important three-minute speech.
The first speaker bore the Gaelic name Patrick J. O'Haire. Born in Ireland, he attended school for only
four years, drifted to America, worked as a mechanic, then as a chauffeur.
Now, however, he was forty, he had a growing family and needed more money, so he tried selling
trucks. Suffering from an inferiority complex that, as he put it, was eating his heart out, he had to walk up and
down in front of an office half a dozen times before he could summon up enough courage to open the door. He
was so discouraged as a salesman that he was thinking of going back to working with his hands in a machine
shop, when one day he received a letter inviting him to an organization meeting of the Dale Carnegie Course in
Effective Speaking.
He didn’t want to attend. He feared he would have to associate with a lot of college graduates, that he
would be out of place.
His despairing wife insisted that he go, saying, “It may do you some good, Pat. God knows you need
it.” He went down to the place where the meeting was to be held and stood on the sidewalk for five minutes
before he could generate enough self-confidence to enter the room.
The first few times he tried to speak in front of the others, he was dizzy with fear. But as the weeks
drifted by, he lost all fear of audiences and soon found that he loved to talk—the bigger the crowd, the better.
And he also lost his fear of individuals and of his superiors. He presented his ideas to them, and soon he had
129
been advanced into the sales department. He had become a valued and much liked member of his company. This
night, in the Hotel Pennsylvania, Patrick O'Haire stood in front of twenty-five hundred people and told a gay,
rollicking story of his achievements. Wave after wave of laughter swept over the audience. Few professional
speakers could have equaled his performance.
The next speaker, Godfrey Meyer, was a gray-headed banker, the father of eleven children. The first
time he had attempted to speak in class, he was literally struck dumb. His mind refused to function. His story is
a vivid illustration of how leadership gravitates to the person who can talk.
He worked on Wall Street, and for twenty-five years he had been living in Clifton, New Jersey. During
that time, he had taken no active part in community affairs and knew perhaps five hundred people.
Shortly after he had enrolled in the Carnegie course, he received his tax bill and was infuriated by what
he considered unjust charges. Ordinarily, he would have sat at home and fumed, or he would have taken it out in
grousing to his neighbors. But instead, he put on his hat that night, walked into the town meeting, and blew off
steam in public.
As a result of that talk of indignation, the citizens of Clifton, New Jersey, urged him to run for the town
council. So for weeks he went from one meeting to another, denouncing waste and municipal extravagance.
There were ninety-six candidates in the field. When the ballots were counted, lo, Godfrey Meyer’s
name led all the rest. Almost overnight, he had become a public figure among the forty thousand people in his
community. As a result of his talks, he made eighty times more friends in six weeks than he had been able to
previously in twenty-five years.
And his salary as councilman meant that he got a return of 1,000 percent a year on his investment in the
Carnegie course.
The third speaker, the head of a large national association of food manufacturers, told how he had been
unable to stand up and express his ideas at meetings of a board of directors.
As a result of learning to think on his feet, two astonishing things happened. He was soon made
president of his association, and in that capacity, he was obliged to address meetings all over the United States.
Excerpts from his talks were put on the Associated Press wires and printed in newspapers and trade magazines
throughout the country.
In two years, after learning to speak more effectively, he received more free publicity for his company
and its products than he had been able to get previously with a quarter of a million dollars spent in direct
advertising. This speaker admitted that he had formerly hesitated to telephone some of the more important
business executives in Manhattan and invite them to lunch with him. But as a result of the prestige he had
acquired by his talks, these same people telephoned him and invited him to lunch and apologized to him for
encroaching on his time.
The ability to speak is a shortcut to distinction. It puts a person in the limelight, raises one head and
shoulders above the crowd. And the person who can speak acceptably is usually given credit for an ability out of
all proportion to what he or she really possesses.
A movement for adult education has been sweeping over the nation; and the most spectacular force in
that movement was Dale Carnegie, a man who listened to and critiqued more talks by adults than has any other
man in captivity. According to a cartoon by "Believe-It-or-Not” Ripley, he had criticized 150,000 speeches. If
that grand total doesn’t impress you, remember that it meant one talk for almost every day that has passed since
Columbus discovered America. Or, to put it in other words, if all the people who had spoken before him had
used only three minutes and had appeared before him in succession, it would have taken ten months, listening
day and night, to hear them all.
Dale Carnegie’s own career, filled with sharp contrasts, was a striking example of what a person can
accomplish when obsessed with an original idea and afire with enthusiasm.
Born on a Missouri farm ten miles from a railway, he never saw a streetcar until he was twelve years
old; yet by the time he was forty-six, he was familiar with the far-flung corners of the earth, everywhere from
130
Hong Kong to Hammerfest; and, at one time, he approached closer to the North Pole than Admiral Byrd’s
headquarters at Little America was to the South Pole.
This Missouri lad who had once picked strawberries and cut cockleburs for five cents an hour became
the highly paid trainer of the executives of large corporations in the art of self-expression.
This erstwhile cowboy who had once punched cattle and branded calves and ridden fences out in
western South Dakota later went to London to put on shows under the patronage of the royal family.
This chap who was a total failure the first half-dozen times he tried to speak in public later became my
personal manager. Much of my success has been due to training under Dale Carnegie.
Young Carnegie had to struggle for an education, for hard luck was always battering away at the old
farm in northwest Missouri with a flying tackle and a body slam. Year after year, the “102” River rose and
drowned the corn and swept away the hay. Season after season, the fat hogs sickened and died from cholera, the
bottom fell out of the market for cattle and mules, and the bank threatened to foreclose the mortgage.
Sick with discouragement, the family sold out and bought another farm near the State Teachers’
College at Warrensburg, Missouri. Board and room could be had in town for a dollar a day, but young Carnegie
couldn’t afford it. So he stayed on the farm and commuted on horseback three miles to college each day. At
home, he milked the cows, cut the wood, fed the hogs, and studied his Latin verbs by the light of a coal-oil lamp
until his eyes blurred and he began to nod.
Even when he got to bed at midnight, he set the alarm for three o’clock. His father bred pedigreed
Duroc-Jersey hogs—and there was danger, during the bitter cold nights, that the young pigs would freeze to
death; so they were put in a basket, covered with a gunny sack, and set behind the kitchen stove. True to their
nature, the pigs demanded a hot meal at 3 A.M. So when the alarm went off, Dale Carnegie crawled out of the
blankets, took the basket of pigs out to their mother, waited for them to nurse, and then brought them back to the
warmth of the kitchen stove.
There were six hundred students in State Teachers’ College, and Dale Carnegie was one of the isolated
half-dozen who couldn’t afford to board in town. He was ashamed of the poverty that made it necessary for him
to ride back to the farm and milk the cows every night. He was ashamed of his coat, which was too tight, and his
trousers, which were too short. Rapidly developing an inferiority complex, he looked about for some shortcut to
distinction. He soon saw that there were certain groups in college that enjoyed influence and prestige—the
football and baseball players and the chaps who won the debating and public-speaking contests.
Realizing that he had no flair for athletics, he decided to win one of the speaking contests. He spent
months preparing his talks. He practiced as he sat in the saddle galloping to college and back; he practiced his
speeches as he milked the cows; and then he mounted a bale of hay in the barn and with great gusto and gestures
harangued the frightened pigeons about the issues of the day.
But in spite of all his earnestness and preparation, he met with defeat after defeat. He was eighteen at
the time-sensitive and proud. He became so discouraged, so depressed, that he even thought of suicide. And then
suddenly he began to win, not one contest, but every speaking contest in college.
Other students pleaded with him to train them; and they won also.
After graduating from college, he started selling correspondence courses to the ranchers among the
sand hills of western Nebraska and eastern Wyoming. In spite of all his boundless energy and enthusiasm, he
couldn’t make the grade. He became so discouraged that he went to his hotel room in Alliance, Nebraska, in the
middle of the day, threw himself across the bed, and wept in despair. He longed to go back to college, he longed
to retreat from the harsh battle of life; but he couldn’t. So he resolved to go to Omaha and get another job. He
didn’t have the money for a railroad ticket, so he traveled on a freight train, feeding and watering two carloads
of wild horses in return for his passage, After landing in south Omaha, he got a job selling bacon and soap and
lard for Armour and Company. His territory was up among the Badlands and the cow and Indian country of
western South Dakota. He covered his territory by freight train and stagecoach and horseback and slept in
pioneer hotels where the only partition between the rooms was a sheet of muslin. He studied books on
salesmanship, rode bucking bronchos, played poker with the Indians, and learned how to collect money. And
when, for example, an inland storekeeper couldn’t pay cash for the bacon and hams he had ordered, Dale
131
Carnegie would take a dozen pairs of shoes off his shelf, sell the shoes to the railroad men, and forward the
receipts to Armour and Company.
He would often ride a freight train a hundred miles a day. When the train stopped to unload freight, he
would dash uptown, see three or four merchants, get his orders; and when the whistle blew, he would dash down
the street again lickety-split and swing onto the train while it was moving.
Within two years, he had taken an unproductive territory that had stood in the twenty-fifth place and
had boosted it to first place among all the twenty-nine car routes leading out of south Omaha. Armour and
Company offered to promote him, saying: “You have achieved what seemed impossible.” But he refused the
promotion and resigned, went to New York, studied at the American Academy of Dramatic Arts, and toured the
country, playing the role of Dr. Hartley in Polly of the Circus.
He would never be a Booth or a Barrymore. He had the good sense to recognize that, So back he went
to sales work, selling automobiles and trucks for the Packard Motor Car Company.
He knew nothing about machinery and cared nothing about it. Dreadfully unhappy, he had to scourge
himself to his task each day. He longed to have time to study, to write the books he had dreamed about writing
back in college. So he resigned. He was going to spend his days writing stories and novels and support himself
by teaching in a night school.
Teaching what? As he looked back and evaluated his college work, he saw that his training in public
speaking had done more to give him confidence, courage, poise and the ability to meet and deal with people in
business than had all the rest of his college courses put together, so he urged the Y.M.C.A. schools in New York
to give him a chance to conduct courses in public speaking for people in business.
What? Make orators out of business people? Absurd. The Y.M.C.A. people knew. They had tried such
courses—and they had always failed. When they refused to pay him a salary of two dollars a night, he agreed to
teach on a commission basis and take a percentage of the net profits—if there were any profits to take. And
inside of three years they were paying him thirty dollars a night on that basis—instead of two.
The course grew. Other ‘Ys’ heard of it, then other cities. Dale Carnegie soon became a glorified
circuit rider covering New York, Philadelphia, Baltimore and later London and Paris. All the textbooks were too
academic and impractical for the business people who flocked to his courses. Because of this he wrote his own
book entitled Public Speaking and Influencing Men in Business. It became the official text of all the Y.M.C.A.s
as well as of the American Bankers’ Association and the National Credit Men’s Association.
Dale Carnegie claimed that all people can talk when they get mad. He said that if you hit the most
ignorant man in town on the jaw and knock him down, he would get on his feet and talk with an eloquence, heat
and emphasis that would have rivaled that world famous orator William Jennings Bryan at the height of his
career. He claimed that almost any person can speak acceptably in public if he or she has self-confidence and an
idea that is boiling and stewing within.
The way to develop self-confidence, he said, is to do the thing you fear to do and get a record of
successful experiences behind you. So he forced each class member to talk at every session of the course. The
audience is sympathetic. They are all in the same boat; and, by constant practice, they develop a courage,
confidence and enthusiasm that carry over into their private speaking.
Dale Carnegie would tell you that he made a living all these years, not by teaching public speaking -
that was incidental. His main job was to help people conquer their fears and develop courage.
He started out at first to conduct merely a course in public speaking, but the students who came were
businessmen and women. Many of them hadn’t seen the inside of a classroom in thirty years. Most of them were
paying their tuition on the installment plan. They wanted results and they wanted them quick—results that they
could use the next day in business interviews and in speaking before groups.
So he was forced to be swift and practical. Consequently, he developed a system of training that is
unique—a striking combination of public speaking, salesmanship, human relations and applied psychology.
132
A slave to no hard-and-fast rules, he developed a course that is as real as the measles and twice as
much fun.
When the classes terminated, the graduates formed clubs of their own and continued to meet fortnightly
for years afterward. One group of nineteen in Philadelphia met twice a month during the winter season for
seventeen years. Class members frequently travel fifty or a hundred miles to attend classes. One student used to
commute each week from Chicago to New York. Professor William James of Harvard used to say that the
average person develops only 10 percent of his latent mental ability. Dale Carnegie, by helping businessmen and
women to develop their latent possibilities, created one of the most significant movements in adult education
– Lowell Thomas
1936
THE DALE CARNEGIE COURSES
THE DALE CARNEGIE COURSE IN EFFECTIVE SPEAKING AND HUMAN RELATIONS
Probably the most popular program ever offered in developing better interpersonal relations, this course is
designed to develop self-confidence, the ability to get along with others in one’s family and in social and
occupational relations, to increase ability to communicate ideas, to build positive attitudes, increase enthusiasm,
reduce tension and anxiety and to increase one’s enjoyment of life. Not only do many thousands of individuals
enroll in this course each year, but it has been used by companies, government agencies and other organizations
to develop the potential of their people.
THE DALE CARNEGIE SALES COURSE
This in-depth participative program is designed to help persons currently engaged in sales or sales management
to become more professional and successful in their careers. It covers the vital but little understood element of
customer motivation and its application to any product or service that is being sold. Salespeople are put on the
firing line of actual sales situations and learn to use motivational selling methods.
THE DALE CARNEGIE MANAGEMENT SEMINAR
This program sets forth the Dale Carnegie principles of human relations and applies them to business. The
importance of balancing results attained with the development of people-potential to assure long-term growth
and profit is highlighted. Participants construct their own position descriptions and learn how to stimulate
creativity in their people, motivate, delegate and communicate, as well as solve problems and make decisions in
a systematic manner. Application of these principles to each person’s own job is emphasized.
If you are interested in any of these courses, details on when and where they are offered in your community can
be obtained by writing to:
Dale Carnegie & Associates, Inc.
1475 Franklin Ave.
Garden City, N.Y. 11530
OTHER BOOKS
How to Stop Worrying & Start Living by Dale Carnegie
A practical, concrete, easy-to-read, inspiring handbook on conquering work and fears.
Simon & Schuster, 1230 Ave. of the Americas, N.Y.C 10020
133
134
Lincoln the Unknown by Dale Carnegie
A fascinating story of little-known facts and insights about this great American.
Dale Carnegie & Associates, Inc., 1475 Franklin Ave., Garden City, N.Y. 11530
The Quick and Easy Way to Effective Speaking by Dorothy Carnegie
Principles and practical implementation of expressing one-self before groups of people.
Dale Carnegie & Associates, Inc., 1475 Franklin Ave., Garden City, N.Y. 11530
Download Dale Carnegie’s Golden Book
Thank You For Reading.
This has been a presentation of
This e-book is only one of the many gifts from The Freeload Page. Click here to
find out the rest!

48 Laws of Power

THE 48 LAWS OF POWER
ROBERT GREENE has a degree in classical studies
and has been an editor at Esquire and oflmt magazines.
He is also a playwright and lives in Los Angeles.
JOOST ELFERS is the producer of 772: 48 Laws ofPawer
and also of
The Sam: Language cyFB:fi-tkdays
with Gary Goldschneider
The Semi Languages ofReiatiansiuyu
with Gary Goldschneider
Play with Hmr Facet‘
with Saxton Freymann
P
O
W
E
R
ROBERT GREENE
A JOOST ELFFERS PRODUCTION
P PROFILE BOOKS
This paperback edition published in 2000
Reprinted 200}, 2002
First published in Great Britain in 1998 by
Profile Books Ltd
58A Hatnon Garden
London ECIN RLX
First published in the United States in 1998 by
Viking, a division ofPenguin Putnam Inc.
Copyright ® Robert Greene aridjoost Elflers, 1998
A portion of this work first appeared in '17w Uzne Reader
Typeset in BE Baskerville
Printed and bound in Italy by
Legoprint S.p.a. —
Lavis (TN)
The moral right of the authors has been asserted.
All rights reserved. Without limiting the rights under copyright reserved above, no part of this publication may be
reproduced, shared or introduced into a. retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means (electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise), without the prior written peimission ofboth the copyright
owner and the publisher of this book.
A CIP catalogue record for this booliis available from the British Library.
ISBN 1 86197 278 4-
A Iieasury ofJewish Fhlklare by Nathan Ausubel, Cnpyfight (S13 1948, 1976 by Crown Publishers, Inc. Reprinted by
pemiission of Crown Publishers, Inc.
7712 C/tines: Looking Glass by Dennis Bloodworth. Copyright (C) 1966, 1967 by Dennis Bloudworth. By permission of
Ferrar, Straus and Giroux.
7712 Baal: oftfw Courtier by Baldcsar Castiglione, translated by George Bull; Penguin Books (London). Copyright ©
George Bull, 1967.
The Golden Dream: Seekers eff}! Domtla by Walker Chapman; Bobbs-Merrill. Copyright © 1967 by Walker Chapman.
TIteBa1gz'as by Ivan Cloulas, translated by Gilda Roberts; Franklin Watts, Inc. Copyright ® 1987 by Librairie
Artheme Faynrd. Translation copyright CC) I989 by Franklin Watts, Inc.
Vézrious Fablesfiom I/Zmbus Places, edited by Diane Di Prima; Capricorn Books /’ G. P. Putnanfs Sons. (0 1960 G. P.
Pulnam’s Sons.
Arnmzian Fol/rtala and Fables, translated by Charles Downing; Oxford University Press. © Charles Downing 1972.
771: Little Brown Baa/c afAneca?0tes, edited by Clifton Fadiman; Little, Brown and Company. C'x>pyn'ghc (0 L985 by
Little, Brown and Company (ln<:.)
Z7zePowzr ofthe Charlalan by Grete de Francesco, translated by Miriam Beard, Copyright, 1939, by Yale University
Press. By permission of Yale University Press.
77ze Omzle: A Marmot zftlw Art ofDi.cmtian by Baltasar Gracién, translated by L. B. Walton", Orion Press.
Behind the Same: afRoyulPalam in Korea (Yi Dynasty) by Ha 'lb.e»hung. Copynght (fl 1983 by Ha Tae~hu.ng. By perm.is~
slot: ofYonsei University Press, Seoul.
7712 Hiszaries by Herodotus, translated by Aubrey de Sélincoun, revised by A. R. Bum; Penguin Books (London).
Copyrifixt © the Estate ofAubrey de Sélincouri, 1954. Copyright (3 A. K Bum, l972.
Hollywaadby Garson Kanin (Viking). Copyright © 1967, l974 by T. F. T, Corporation.
Fabierfrom Africa, collected byjan Knappcrt; Evan Brothers Limited (London). Collection © l980]=m Knappcrt.
Ike Great Fables ofAllNatimLs, selected by Manuel Komroff; Tudor Publishing Company. Copyright, 1928, by Dial
Press, Inc.
Sxizcted Fuller by jean de La Fonmine, translated by James Michic; Penguin Books (London). Translation copyright
Qjames Mickie, 1979.
The Romance qftilz Rosa by Guillaume de Lorris, translated by Charles Dahlberg; Princeton University Press.
172: Complm Essays by Michel de Montaigne, translated by M. A. Screech; Penguin Books (London). Translation
copyright o M. A. Screech, I987, 1991.
A Book qfFa've Rings by Miyamobo Musashi, uanslatcd by Victor Harris; Overlook Press. Copyright © l97=l by Victor
The New 0zy‘i2rdAnnotated Bible with the Apaaypluz, revised standard version, edited by Heibert G. May and Bruce M.
Metzger; Oxford University Press. Copyright © 1973 by Oxford University Press, Inc.
Makers efkome: Nine Lines by Plutarch, translated by Ian Scott~Kilveit; Penguin Books (London). Copyright © Ian
Scott—Kilvert, 1965.
7722 Rise and Fuli ofAt/tens: Nine Greek Lives by Plutarch, translated by Ian Scotl«Kilvert; Penguin Books (London).
Copyright ® Ian Scott~Kilvert, 1960.
Chemo-ya." Ihejapanesz Tia Ceremony by A. L. Sadler; Charles E. Thttle Company, '11.!) 1962 by Charles E. Tuttle Co
Amara! Politia: The Persistent Iiuth qfil/Iathiavellism by Ben~Ami Scharfstein; State University of New York Press.
© l995 State University of New York.
Caravan nfbnzam by [dries Shah; Octagon Press (London). Copyright © 1970, 1980 by Idries Shah.
Ihles ofthc Dervixlxes by Idries Shah. Copyright © Idries Shah, 1967. Used by permission of Penguin Putnam lnc. and
Octagon Press (London).
The Craft offlnoev by R. G. H. Siu; john Wiley &. Sons. Copyright © 1979 by john Wiley 8: Sons, Inc.
The Subtle Ruse: 77;: Bank af/imbiv Wisdom and Guile, translated by Rene R. Khawam; East-West Publications. C0py~
right @> L980 English translation East~West Publications Ltd.
Tiwzirt of M17 by Suirtzu, translated by Thomas Cleary; Shambhala Publications. ((3 1938 by Thomas Cleary.
The Art of War by Sun-tzn, translated by Yuan Shibing. © 1987 by General Tao Hanshang. Used by pennission of
Sterling Publishing Co., Inc., 387 Park Avenue South, New York, NY 10016,
The Histmy ofthe Pelaponnssian War by Thucyclides, translated by Rex Wamcr; Penguin Books (London). Translation
copyright Rex Warner, 1954.
The Thurber Carnival by James Thurber; Ha.q:erCollins. Copyright l9¢5 by James Thurber,
Tlw Court Artist: On thezimemy ofllw Modern Artist by Martin Wamlce, translated by David McLintouk. Translation ©
Maison des Sciences de 1’Homme and Cambridge University Press 1993. By permission of Cambridge University
Press.
The Can Game and “lfzlbw Kid” Mil.' 77:5 Autobiography ofllze Famous Can Artist as told to W. T Brannon; Dover Publications. Copyright © 1948 by W. T‘. Brannon.
27: Anna Biller, and ta my parents
R. G.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Firstl would like to thank Anna Biller, who helped edit and research this book, and whose invaluable insights played a critical role in the shape and content of 17w 48 Laws. Without her,
none of this would have been possible.
I must also thank my dear friend Michiel Schwarz who was responsible for involving me in
the art school Fabrika in Italy and introducing me there to _]oost Elffers, my partner and producer
of The 48 Laws ofPower. It was in the scheming world ofFabrika that_]oost and I saw the timelessness of Machiavelli and from our discussions in Venice, Italy, this book was born.
I would like to thank Henri Le Goubin, who supplied me with many Machiavellian anec~
dotes over the years, particularly conceming the numerous French characters who play such a
large role in this book.
I would also iike to thank Les and Sumiko Biller, who lent me their library on Japanese history and helped me with the Japanese Tea Ceremony part of the book. Similarly, I must thank
my good friend Elizabeth Yang who advised me on Chinese history.
A book like this depended greatly on the research material available andl am particularly
grateful to the UCLA Research Library; I
spent many pleasant days wandering through its incomparable collections.
My parents, Laurette and Stanley Green, deserve endless thanks for their patience and
support.
And I must not forget to pay tribute to my cat, Boris, who kept me company throughout the
never—ending days ofwriting.
Finally, to those people in my life who have so skillfully used the game of power to manipu~
late, torture, and cause me pain over the years, I bear you no grudges and I thank you for sup
plying me with inspiration for The 48 Laws 0fP0wer.
Rabert Greene
mfii ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
CONTENTS
PREFACE page zrrzii
LAW 1 page I
NEVER OUTSHINE THE MASTER
Always make those above you feel comfortably superior In your desire to please or impress them, do not go
toofar in displayingyour talent: oryou might accomplish the oppasite~»—-inspirefear and insecurity. Make
your masters appear more brilliant than they are and you will attain the heights ofpower.
LAW 2 page 8
NEVER PUT TOO MUCH TRUST IN FRIENDS,
LEARN HOW TO USE ENEMIES
Be wary :.3ffziends——~they will betray you more quickly, for they are easibr aroused to envy. 'I‘hey also become
spoiled and tyrannical. But hire a
former enemy and he will be more loyal than a
friend, because he has more
to prove. Infact, you have more tofearfromfriends thanfitrm enemies. Ifyou have no enemies, find a way to
make them.
LAW 3 page 16
CONCEAL YOUR INTENTIONS
Keep people off-balance and in the dark by never revealing the purpose behind your actions. Ifthey have no
clue what you are up to, they cannotprepare a defense. Guide themfar enough down the wrongpath, envelop
them in enough smoke, and by the time thrgv realize your intentions, it will be too late.
LAW 4 page 31
ALVVAYS SAY LESS THAN NECESSARY
When you are trying to impress people with words, the more you say, the more rommon you appear, and tlw less
in control. Even ifyou are saying something banal, it will seem original ifyou make it vague, open—ended,
and sphinxlike. Powerfltl people impress and intimidate by saying less. The more you say, the more likely you
are to say somethingfoolish.
LAW 5 /mge37
SO MUCH DEPENDS ON REPUTATION-—-GUARD IT WITH YOUR LIFE
Reputation is the cornerstone ofpower. Through reputation alone you can intimidate and win," once it slips,
however, you are vulnerable, and will be attacked on all sides. Make your reputation unassailable. Always be
akrt to potential attacks and thwart them before they happen. Meanwhile, learn to destroy your enemies by
opening holes in their own reputations. Then stand aside and let public opinion hang them.
LAVV 6 page 44
COURT ATTENTION AT ALL COST
Everything is judged by its appearance; what is unseen counts for nothing: Never let yourselfget lost in the
crowd, then, orburied in oblivion. Stand out. He conspicuous, at all cost. Malzeyourselfa magnet ofattention
by appearing larger, more colorful more mysterious than the bland and timid masses.
CONTENTS [1
LAW 7 page 56
GET OTHERS TO DO THE WORK FOR YOU, BUT ALWAYS TAKE THE CREDIT
Use the wisdom, knowledge, and legwork of other people to further your own muse. Not only will such assistance save you valuable time and energy, it will give you a godlike aura of ejficiertcy and speed. In the end
your hehpers will beforgotten andyou will be remembered. Never do yourselfwhat others can doforyou.
LAW 8 page 62
MAKE OTHER PEOPLE COME TO YOU—-USE BAIT IF NECESSARY
When you forte the other person to act, you are the one in control. It is always better to make your opponent
come to you, abandoning his own plans in theprocess. Lure him withfabulous gains-then attack. You hold
the cards. -
LAW’ 9 page 69
WIN THROUGH YOUR ACTIONS, NEVER THROUGH ARGUMENT
Any momentary triumph you think you have gained through argument is really a
Iyrrhir victory: The resent»
ment and ill will you stir up is stronger and lasts longer than any momentary change ofopinion. It is much
more powerful to get others to agree with you through your actions, without saying :1 word. Demonstrate, do
not explicate.
LAW 1 0 page 76
INFECTION: AVOID THE UNHAPPY AND UNLUCKY
You can diefrom someone else’: misery-——emotional states are as infectious as diseases. Km may feel you are
helping the drowning man but you are only precipitatingyour own disaster: The unfortunate sometimes draw
misfortune on themselves; they will also draw it on you. Associate with the happy andfortunate instead.
LAW 1 1 page 82
LEARN TO KEEP PEOPLE DEPENDENT ON YOU
To maintain your independence you must always be needed and wanted. The more you are relied on, the more
freedom you have. Make people depend on youfor their happiness andprosperity and you have nothing tofear.
Never touch them enough so that they can do without you.
LAVV 12 page 89
USE SELECTIVE HONESTY AND GENEROSITY TO DISARM YOUR VICTIM
One sincere and honest move will cover over dozens of dishonest ones. 0pen~hea7ted gestures of honesty and
gertemsity bring down the guard ofeven the most suspicions people. Once your selective honesty opens a hole in
their armor; you can deceive and manipulate them at will. A timely gzfl-ma ’}i‘q,v'an horse-——zoill serve the same
purpose.
LAW I 3 page 95
WHEN ASKING FOR HELP, APPEAL TO PEOPLE’S SELFAINTEREST,
NEVER TO THEIR MERCY OR GRATITUDE
Ifyou need to turn to an allyfor help, do not bother to remind him ofyourpast assistance and good deeds. He
willfind a way to ignore you. Instead, uncover something in your request, or in your alliance with him, that
will benefit him, and emphasize it out of all proportion, He will respond enthusiastically when he sees something to be gainedfor himself.
1- comsms
LAW 14 page 107
POSE AS A FRIEND, WORK AS A SPY
Knowing about your rival is critical. Use spies to gather valuable information that will keep you a
step ahead.
Better still: Play the spy yourself In polite social encounters, learn to probe. Ask indirect questions to get people
to reveal their weaknesses and intentions. There is no occasion that is not an opportunityfinr artful spying.
LAW J5 page 107
CRUSH YOUR ENEMY TOTALLY
All great leaders since Adoses have known that a
feared enemy must be crushed completely. (Sometimes they
have learned this the hard way.) Ifone ember is left alight, no matter how dimly it smolders, a
fire will eventually break out. More is lost through stopping halfway than through total annihilation: The enemy will recover,
and will seek revenge. Crush him, not only in body but in spirit.
LAW 16 page 115
USE ABSENCE TO INCREASE RESPECT AND HONOR
Too much circulation makes the price go down: The more you are seen and heardfrom, the more common you
appear Ifyou are already established in a group, temporary withdrawalfrom it will make you more talked
about, even more admired. You must learn when to leave. Create value through scarcity.
LAW 17 page 1:23
KEEP OTHERS IN SUSPENDED TERROR: CULTIVATE AN AIR OF UNPREDICTABILITY
Humans are creatures of habit with an insatiable need to see familiarity in otherpeoples actions. Your predictability gives them a sense ofcontrol. Turn the tables: Be deliberately unpredictable. Behavior that seems to
have no consistency orpurpose will keep them off—balance, and they will wear themselves out trying to explain
your moves. Taken to an extreme, this strategy can intimidate and terrorize.
LAW 18 page 130
DO NOT BUILD FORTRESSES TO PROTECT YOURSELF—ISOLATION IS DANGEROUS
The world is dangerous and memies are everywhere——et/eryone has to protect themselves. A fortres.s seems the
safest. But isolation exposes you to more dangers than it protects you frorn—-—it cuts you offflom valuable information, it makes you conspicuous and an easy target. Better to circulate amongpeople, find allies, mingle.
You are shieldedfrom your by the crowd.
LAW no page 137
KNOW WHO YOU'RE DEALING WITH—DO NOT OFFEND THE WRONG PERSON
There are many different kinds ofpeople in the world, and you can never assume that everyone will react to
your strategies in the same way. Deceive or outmaneuver somepeople and they will spend the rest oftheir lives
seeking revenge. They are wolves in lambs’ clothing. Choose your victims and opponents carefully, then—
never offend or deceive the wrongperson.
CONTENTS xi
LIXW 20 page 14;)’
DO NOT COMMIT TO ANYONE
It is thefool who always rushes to take sides. Do not commit to any side or cause but yourseh‘. By maintaining
your independence, you become the master of(ufhers—~playingj7eo[1le against one another: making them pursue
you.
LAW 21 page 156
PLAY A SUCKER TO CATCH A SUCKER—--SEEM DUMBER THAN YOUR MARK
No one likesjeeling smpider than the nextperson. The trick, then, is to makeyour victimsjeel smart—and not
just smart, out smarter than you are. Once convinced o/"this, they will never suspect that you may have ulterior motives‘
LAW 22 page 163
USE THE SURRENDER TACTIC: TRANSFORM WEAKNESS INTO POWER
When you are weaker; neverfight for honor’s sake; choose surrender instead. Surrender gives you time to necouer, time to torment and irritate your conqueror; time to waitfor his power to wane. Do not give him the sat»
isfaction offighting and defeatingyou——surrenderfirst. By turning the other cheek you infiiriate and unsettle
him. Make surrender a tool ofprmren
LAVV 23 page 171
CONCENTRATE YOUR FORCES
Conserveyourforces and energies by keeping them conrentrated at their stwngastjsaint. You gain more byfind~
ing a rich mine and mining it deeper; than byflittingfrom one shallow mine to anotherwintenstty defeats extensity every time. When lookingfor sourres ofpower to elevate you, find the one key patron, thefat cow who
will give you milhjor a longtime to
LAW 24 page 178
PLAY THE PERFECT COURTIER
The perfect eourtier thrives in a world where everything revolves around power and political dexterity‘ He has
mastered the art ofindirection; heflutters, yields to superiors, and asserts power over others in the most oblique
and graceful manner Learn and apply the laws ofcorurtiership and there will be no limit to howfaryou can
rise in the court.
LAW 25 page 19;/'
RE-CREATE YOURSELF
Do not acvept the roles that society foists on you. Rmreate yourself by forging a new identity, one that commands attention and never bones the audience. Be the master ofyour own image rather than letting others define it for you. Ineorporate dramatic devices into your public gestures and octiom——your power will be
enhanced and your character will seem larger than life.
LAW 26 page 200
KEEP YOUR HANDS CLEAN
Km must seem a paragon ofcivility and Your hands are never soiled by mistakes and nasty deeds.
Maintain such a spotless afrpearance by using others as scapegoats and eativpaws to disguise your in»
volvement.
xii CONTENTS
LAW 27 page 225
PLAY ON PEOPLE'S NEED TO BELIEVE TO CREATE A CULTLIKE FOLLOWING
People have an overwhelming desire to believe in something. Become thefocalpoint of such desire by ojj‘m'ng
them a cause, a nemfaith to follow. Keep your wants vague but full ofpromise; emphasize enthusiasm over
rationality and clear thinking. Give your new disciples rituals to perform, ask them to make sacrifices on your
oehaqf In the absence oforganized religion and grand causes, your new belief system will bring you untold
power.
LAW 28 page 227
ENTER ACTION WITH BOLDNESS
Ifyou are unsure of a course of action, do not attempt it. Your doubts and hesitations will infect your execution, Timidity is dangerous: Better to enter with boldness. Any mistakes you commit through audacity are eas»
ily corrected with more audacity. Everyone admires the bold; no one honors the léfllid.
LAW 29 page 236
PLAN ALL THE WAY TO THE END
The ending is everything. Plan all the way to it, taking into account all the possible consequences, obstacles,
and twists offortune that might reverse your hard work and give the glory to others. By planning to the end
you will not be overwhelmed by circumstances and you will know when to stop. Gently guidefortune and help
determine thefittune by thinkingfar ahead.
LA‘/V 30 page 245
MAKE YOUR ACCOMPLISHMENTS SEEM EFFORTLESS
Your actions must seem natural and executed with ease. All the toil and practice that go into them, and also
all the clever tricks, must be concealed. When you act, act eflortlessly, as zfyou could do much more. Avoid the
temptation of-revealing how hard you wurk—it only raises questions. Teach no one your tricks or they will be
used against you.
LAW 31 page 25-?
CONTROL THE OPTIONS: GET OTHERS TO PLAY WITH THE CARDS YOU DEAL
The best deceptions are the ones that seem to give the other person a choice: Your victimsfeel they are in control,
but are actually yourpuppets. Give people options that some out in yourfavor whichever one they choose, Force
them to make choices between the lesser oftwo evils, both ofwhich serve yourpurpose. Put them on the horns of
a dilemma: They are gored wherever they turn.
LAW 3 2 page 263
PLAY TO PEOPLES FANTASIES
The truth is often avoided because it is ugly and unjbleasant. Never appeal to truth and reality unless you are
preparedfor the anger that comes from disenchantment. Life is so harsh and distressing that people who can
manufacture romance or conjure npfarztasy are like oases in the desert: Everyoneflocks to them. There is great
power in tapping into thefantasies ofthe masses.
CO NTENTS xiii
LAW’ 33 page ‘.771
DISCOVER EACH MAN'S THUMBSCREW
Everyone has a weakness, a gap in the castle wall. That weakness is usually an insecurity, an uncontrollable
emotion or need; it can also be a smafl secret pleasure. Either may, oncefound, it is a thumbscrew you can turn
to your advantage.
LAW 734 page 252
BE ROYAL IN YOUR OWN FASHION: ACT LIKE A KING TO BE TREATED LIKE ONE
The way you carry yourselfwill often determine how you are treated: In the long run, appearing vulgar or common will make people disrespect you. For a
king respects himselfand inspires the same sentiment in others. By
acting regally and confident ofyour powers, you make yourselfseem destined to wear a crown.
LAVV 33 page 291
MASTER THE ART OF TIMING
Never seem to be in a hurry—hurrying betrays a lack of control overyourself: and over time. Always seem patient, as ifyou know that everything will come to you eventually. Become a detective ofthe right moment;
out the spirit ofthe times, the trends that will carry you to power: Learn to stand back when the time is not yet
ripe, and to strikefiercely when it has reachedfruition.
LAVV 36 page 300
DISDAIN THINGS YOU CANNOT HAVE: IGNORING THEM IS THE BEST REVENGE
By acknowledging a petgr problem you give it existence and credibility. The more attention you pay an enemy,
the stronger you make him; and a small mistake is often made worse and more visible when you try tofix it. It
is sometimes best to leave things alone. Ifthere is something you want but cannot have, show contemptfor it.
'I7te less interest you reveal, the more superior you seem.
LAW 37 page3()9
CREATE COMPELLING SPECTACLES
Striking imagery and grand symbolic gestures create the aura ofpower—e1/eryone responds to them. Stage spectacles for those around you, then, full of arresting visuals and radiant symbols that heighten your presence.
Dazzled by appearances, no one will notice what you are really doing.
LAVV 38 page 317
THINK AS YOU LIKE BUT BEHAVE LIKE OTHERS
Ifyou make a show ofgoing against the times, flauntingyour unconventional ideas and unorthodox ways,
people will think that you only want attention and that you look down upon them. They willfind a way to
punish youfor making themfeel inferior It isfar safer to blend in and nurture the common touch. Shareyour
originality onh with tolerantfriends and those who are sure to appreciate your uniqueness.
I. /\VV 3 9
page 325
STIR UP WATERS TO CATCH FISH
Anger and emotion are strategically counterproductive. You must always stay calm and objective. But ifyou
can make your enemies angry while staying calm yourselfl you gain a decided advantage. Put your enemies
off-balance: Find the think in their vanity through which you can rattle them and you hold the strings.
.rio CONTENTS
LAW 40 page 333
DESPISE THE FREE LUNCH
What is offeredforfree is dangenms—~it usually involves either a trick or a hidden obligation. What has worth
is worth payingfor By payingyour own way you stay clear ofgratitude, guilt, and deceit. It is also often wise
to pay thefull price-—there is no cutting corners with excellence. Be lavish with your money and it cirrulating, for g'enemsity is a sign and a magnetforpower.
LAVV 4] page 347
AVOID STEPPING INTO A GREAT MAN'S SHOES
What happensfirst always appears better and more original than what comes after Ifyou succeed a great man
or have ajarnous parent, you will have to accomplish double their achievements to outshine them. Do not get
lost in their shadow, or stuck in a past not ofyour own making: Establish your own name and identity by
changing course. Slay the overbearingfathei; disparage his legacy, and gain power by shining in your own
way.
LA W’ 42 page 358
STRIKE THE SHEPHERD AND THE SHEEP WILL SCATTER
Trouble can often be traced to a single strong indi-oidual——the stirrer, the arrogant underling, the poisoner of
goodwill. you allow such people room to operate, others will succumb to their influence. Do not waitfor the
troubles they cause to multiply, do not try to negotiate with them—thty are irredeemable. Neutralize their in»
jluence by isolating orbanishing them. Strike at the source ofthe trouble and the sheep will scatter.
LAVV 43 page 367
WORK ON THE HEARTS AND MINDS OF OTHERS
Coercion creates a reaction that will eventually work against you. You must seduce others into wanting to
move in your direction. Aperson you have seduced becomes your loyal pawn. And the way to seduce others is to
operate on their individualpsychologies and weaknesses. Soften up the resistant by working on their emotions,
playing on what they hold dear and what theyfear: Ignore the hearts and minds ofothers and they will grow to
hate you.
L AVV «'14 page 3 76
DISARM AND INFURIATE WITH THE MIRROR EFFECT
The mirror reflects reality, but it is also the perfect toolfor deception: When you mirroryour enemies, doing ex~
actly as they do, they cannotfigure out your strategy. The Mirror Eflect mocks and humiliates them, making
them overreact. By holding up a mirror to theirpsyehes, you seduce them with the illusion that you share their
values; by holding up a mirror to their actions, you teach them a lesson. Few can resist thepower ofthe Mirror
Effect.
LA‘/V 45 page 392
PREACH THE NEED FOR CHANGE, BUT NEVER REFORM TOO MUCH AT ONCE
Everyone understands the needfor change in the abstract, but on the day-to-day level people are creatures of
habit. Too much innovation is traumatic, and will lead to revolt. Ifyou are new to a position ofpower, or an
outsider trying to build a power base, make a show ofrespecting the old way ofdoing things. Ifchange is necessary, make itfeel like a gentle improvement on the past.
CONTENTS .ro
LAW 46 page 400
NEVER APPEAR TOO PERFECT
Appearing better than others is always dungwmcs, but most drmgmms ofall is to appear to have nofault: or
weaknesses. Envy mates silent enemies. It is smart to occasionally display defects, and admit to harmless
vices, in order to dcflect envy and appear more human and apfiwctchable. Only guds and the dead can seem
pevfect with impunity.
LAW 47 page 410
DO NOT G0 PAST THE MARK YOU AIME!) FOR;
IN VICTORY, LEARN WHEN TO STOP
The moment of victory is often tlw mtmmzi ofgmttest peril. In the heat of victory, armganne and 0vmonfi—
dense can push you past the gmzl you had aimedjbr; and by going toofar, you make more enemies than you
defeat. Do not allow success to go to your head. Time is no substétumfor strategy and canrful planning. Set a
goal, and when you mach it, stop.
LAVV 48 page 419
ASSUME. FORMLESSNESS
By talking a shape, by having a visible plan, you open yourself to attack. Instead of taking afmmfor your
enemy to grasp, keep yoursetfadaptable and on the move. Accept thefaa that nothingis certain and no law is
fixed. The best way to pmtect yourself is to be asfluid andformless as water; never bet on stabifity or lasting
urder. Everything changes.
SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY page 431
[N D EX page 433
231;!‘ C ONTENTS
PREFACE
The feeling of having no power over people and events is generally unbearable to us«—-when we feel helpless we feel miserable. No one wants less
power; everyone wants more. In the world today, however, it is dangerous
to seem too power hungry, to be overt with your power moves. We have
to seem fair and decent. So we need to be subtle~—congenial yet cunning,
democratic yet devious.
This game of constant duplicity most resembles the power dynamic
that existed in the scheming world of the old aristocratic court. Throughout
history, a court has always formed itself around the person in power—king,
queen, emperor, leader. The courtiers who filled this court were in an especially delicate position: They had to serve their masters, but if they seemed
to fawn, if they curried favor too obviously, the other courtiers around
them would notice and would act against them. Attempts to win the master’s favor, then, had to be subtle. And even skilled courtiers capable of
such subtlety still had to protect themselves from their fellow courtiers,
who at all moments were scheming to push them aside.
Meanwhile the court was supposed to represent the height of civilization and refinement. Violent or overt power moves were frowned upon;
couniers would work silently and secretly against any among them who
used force. This was the couxtier’s dilemma: While appearing the very
paragon of elegance, they had to outwit and thwart their own opponents in
the subtlest of ways. The successful comtier learned over time to make all
of his moves indirect; if he stabbed an opponent in the back, it was with a
velvet glove on his hand and the sweetest of smiles on his face. Instead of
using coercion or outright treachery, the perfect courtier got his way
through seduction, charm, deception, and subtle strategy, always planning
several moves ahead. Life in the court was a never-ending game that required constant vigilance and tactical thinking. It was civilized war.
Today we face a peculiarly similar paradox to that of the courtier:
Everything must appear civilized, decent, democratic, and fair. But if we
play by those rules too strictly, if we take them too literally, we are crushed
by those around us who are not so foolish. As the great Renaissance diplomat and courtier Niccolo Machiavelli wrote, “Any man who tries to be
good all the time is bound to come to ruin among the great number who
are not good.” The court imagined itself the pinnacle ofrefinement, but unPREFACE .1’1:{z'
(,'om'Is are, uI1que.x1irmably. the scum‘ ufpuliiee
r/css and good
i>reediIl;,>; were they not
so, they wmtirl be the
seals vfslzmghrer and
rlewluliml. I/msr who
now rmtle upon and
:’mlm1L'e, would uf/‘mm
and mh. well other,
If mannmxs dui nor
iIllC¥‘[3(J.\‘e. . . .
LORD CllI;$'l 1;lI.)-IFID,
1694-1 713’
There is nothing very’
add about lambs
ciisiiking birds ofpn-y,
but this is no ranmzz fr»-
holding it against large
br'rd.s ofpre r
that rluzy
carry offlmnbs. And
when the I/mzlzx wim-
[mr among Iheniselvex,
“
I lww birds‘ nfprcy
are evil, and zz',0e.\ this
not give as (1 right to
Say that whatever is the
«;p;m.s'im ofa bird of
prey must be good.‘’'‘
there is nothing in/rm—
sically wrong Wil/I rut-I:
rm urgummt ~ -
though
{he birds ofprey will
look so/mzwlmt qmzztl
mlly and say. “We have
rmtliirzg agaimi Ifiese
gum! ImnI,>_9'.' in fact, we
love 1lu*rIz;rwIIu'Izg
tastes better t/um a
tender‘ lamb. "
llRllLDl{l(JH ."'4'lE-.’l‘ZS(‘HI:.
l 8444 900
;1miii PREFACE
derneath its glittering surface a cauldron of dark emotions--greed, envy,
lust, hatred-—boi1ed and simmered. Our world today similarly imagines itself the pinnacle of fairness, yet the same ugly emotions still stir within us,
as they have forever. The game is the same. Outwardly, you must seem to
respect the niceties, but inwardly, unless you are a fool, you learn quickly
to be prudent, and to do as Napoleon advised: Place your iron hand inside
a. velvet glove. If, like the courtier of times gone by, you can master the arts
of indirection, learning to seduce, charm, deceive, and subtly outmaneuver
your opponents, you will attain the heights of power. You will be able to
make people bend to your will without their realizing what you have done.
And if they do not realize what you have done, they will neither resent not
resist you.
To some people the notion of consciously playing power games—no matter how indii-ect—seems evil, asocial, a relic of the past. They believe they
can opt out of the game by behaving in ways that have nothing to do with
power. You must beware of such people, for while they express such opin~
ions outwardly, they are often among the most adept players at power.
They utilize strategies that cleverly disguise the nature of the manipulation
involved. These types, for example, will often display their weakness and
lack of power as a kind of moral virtue. But true powerlessness, without
any motive of selfiinterest, would not publicize its weakness to gain sympathy or respect. Making a show of one’s weakness is actually a
very effective
strategy, subtle and deceptive, in the game of power (see Law 22, the Sur—
render Tactic).
Another strategy of the supposed nonplayer is to demand equality in
every area oflife. Everyone must be treated alike, whatever their status and
strength. But to avoid the taint of power, you attempt to treat everyone
equally and fairly, you will confront the problem that some people do certain things better than others. Treating everyone equally means ignoring
their differences, elevating the less skillful and suppressing those who
excel. Again, many of those who behave this way are actually deploying
another power strategy, redistributing people’s rewards in a way that they
determine.
Yet another way of avoiding the game would be perfect honesty and
straightforwardness, since one of the main techniques of those who seek
power is deceit and secrecy. But being perfectly honest will inevitably hurt
and insult a great many people, some of whom will choose to injure you in
return. No one will see your honest statement as completely objective and
free of some personal motivation. And they will be right: In truth, the use
of honesty is indeed a
power strategy, intended to convince people of one’s
noble, goodehearted, selfless character. It is a form of persuasion, even a
subtle form of coercion.
Finally, those who claim to be nonplayers may affect an air of naiveté,
to protect them from the accusation that they are after power. Beware
again, however, for the appearance of naiveté can be an effective means of
deceit (see Law 21, Seem Dumber Than Your Mark). And even genuine
naiveté is not free of the snares of power. Children may be naive in many
ways, but they often act from an elemental need to gain control over those
around them. Children suffer greatly from feeling powerless in the adult
world, and they use any means available to get their way. Genuinely innocent people may still be playing for power, and are often horribly effective
at the game, since they are not hindered by reflection. Once again, those
who make a show or display of innocence are the least innocent of all.
You can recognize these supposed nonplayers by the way they flaunt
their moral qualities, their piety, their exquisite sense of justice. But since
all of us hunger for power, and almost all of our actions are aimed at gaining it, the nonplayers are merely throwing dust in our eyes, distracting us
from their power plays with their air of moral superiority. If you observe
them closely, you will see in fact that they are often the ones most skillful at
indirect manipuiation, even if some of them practice it unconsciously. And
they greatly resent any publicizing of the tactics they use every day.
If the world is like a giant scheming court and we are trapped inside it,
there is no use in trying to opt out of the game. That will only render you
powerless, and powerlessness will make you miserable. Instead of struggling against the inevitable, instead of arguing and whining and feeling
guilty, it is far better to excel at power. In fact, the better you are at dealing
with power, the better friend, lover, husband, wife, and person you be
come. By following the route of the perfect courtier (see Law 24) you learn
to make others feel better about themselves, becoming a source ofpleasure
to them. They will grow dependent on your abilities and desirous of your
presence. By mastering the 48 laws in this book, you spare others the pain
that comes from bungling with power—~by playing with fire without knowing its properties. If the game of power is inescapable, better to be an artist
than 2. denier or a bungler.
Learning the game of power requires a certain way of looking at the world,
a shifting of perspective. It takes effort and years of practice, for much of
the game may not come naturally. Certain basic skills are required, and
once you master these skills you will be able to apply the laws of power
more easily.
The most important of these skills, and power’s crucial foundation, is
the ability to master your emotions. An emotional response to a. situation is
the single greatest barrier to power, a mistake that will cost you a lot more
than any temporary satisfaction you might gain by expressing your feelings. Emotions cloud reason, and if you cannot see the situation clearly,
you cannot prepare for and respond to it with any degree of control.
Anger is the most destructive of emotional responses, for it clouds
your vision the most. It also has a
ripple effect that invariably makes situations less controllable and heightens your enemy’s resolve. If you are try»
ing to destroy an enemy who has hurt you, far better to keep him off—guard
by feigning friendliness than showing your anger.
l
The old)“ means in gum
mm is main‘ with people
are fr7l‘1."£’ um] czmni/lg.
Low a/xv, /hey say; but
[/10] is /0 wail for
sunshine. and life needs
every‘ moment.
JUHANN vow (‘nomm-..
l749»— 1 832
The arrow rim! by tile
zzrdrc-rrn1l_,v or may not
kill (I .i~/'n;:le fI(‘I'\’(m. Hm
.¢rr(zI¢r;,Wn.s' rleviwri by (I
Wm’ man can lull we-n
hr]/)f’S in I/1:‘ womb.
K At : rn.rA .
lNI.|lI\N l’ll|Lf)SUl’lll K.
‘I lllltl) (’l,'\"l l?llY li.(‘.
Pl-RE FACE rile
I
thought to myself
With what means, with
what dtf(?P,‘[}!l0Il.\', with
how many varied arts,
with what! induxzry a
man sharpens his wits
to zleceive another.
and lhrough these
variations the world is
madc more beautiful.
FRA '
nsro V|;’l”l'()Rl,
(‘0.\Il|1MI‘(‘IR/\RY AND
FRIFND or
MA<‘rIIAvr|_i_I.
FA RI Y SI.Y'lT,FNTH
(‘FNTKI RY
There are no principl€SCl/1(’Y(,' are only
evmtr. There is no
good and had, there are
only «:ircmrIslumte,.r.
The superior man
C.\‘p()l4S(’.§' events and
circumstames in order
In guide them. If there
were principlm and
fixed laws, nations
would not change them
as we change our shirrs
and a man curt not be
expecrr/l to be wiser
than an entire mmnn.
HONORE Dr. BALZAC.
1'/‘)‘)~1 850
L1? ;' PREFACE
Love and affection are also potentially destructive, in that they blind
you to the often self-serving interests of those whom you least suspect of
playing a power game. You cannot repress anger or love, or avoid feeling
them, and you should not try. But you should be careful about how you express them, and most important, they should never influence your plans
and strategies in any way.
Related to mastering your emotions is the ability to distance yourself
from the present moment and think objectively about the past and future.
Like Janus, the double—faced Roman deity and guardian of all gates and
doorways, you must be able to look in both directions at once, the better to
handle danger from wherever it comes. Such is the face you must create for
yourself-one face looking continuously to the future and the other to the
ast. P
For the future, the motto is, “No days unalert.” Nothing should catch
you by surprise because you are constantly imagining problems before
they arise. Instead of spending your time dreaming of your plan’s happy
ending, you must work on calculating every possible permutation and pitfall that might emerge in it. The further you see, the more steps ahead you
plan, the more powerful you become.
The other face ofJanus looks constantly to the past—though not to remember past hurts or bear grudges. That would only curb your power.
Half of the game is learning how to forget those events in the past that eat
away at you and cloud your reason. The real purpose of the backwardglancing eye is to educate yourself constantly—you look at the past to learn
from those who came before you. (The many historical examples in this
book will greatly help that process.) Then, having looked to the past, you
look closer at hand, to your own actions and those of your friends. This is
the most vital school you can learn from, because it comes from personal
experience.
You begin by examining the mistakes you have made in the past, the
ones that have most grievously held you back. You analyze them in terms
of the 48 laws of power, and you extract from them a lesson and an oath:
“I shall never repeat such a mistake; I shall never fall into such a
trap
again.” If you can evaluate and observe yourself in this way, you can learn
to break the patterns of the past—an immensely valuable skill.
Power requires the ability to play with appearances. To this end you
must learn to wear many masks and keep a bag full of deceptive tricks. Deception and masquerade should not be seen as ugly or immoral. All human
interaction requires deception on many levels, and in some ways what sep—
arates humans from animals is our ability to lie and deceive. In Greek
myths, in India’s Mahabharata cycle, in the Middle Eastern epic of Gilga~
mesh, it is the privilege of the gods to use deceptive arts; a great man,
Odysseus for instance, was judged by his ability to rival the craftiness of the
gods, stealing some of their divine power by matching them in wits and deception. Deception is a developed art of civilization and the most potent
weapon in the game of power.
You cannot succeed at deception unless you take a somewhat distanced approach to yourself——-unless you can be many different people,
wearing the mask that the day and the moment require. With such a flexi«
ble approach to all appearances, including your own, you lose a lot of the
inward heaviness that holds people down. Make your face as malleable as
the actor’s, work to conceal your intentions from others, practice luring
people into traps. Playing with appearances and mastering arts of decep
tion are among the aesthetic pleasures of life. They are also key compo«
nents in the acquisition of power.
If deception is the most potent weapon in your arsenal, then patience
in all things is your crucial shield. Patience will protect you from making
moronic blunders, Like mastering your emotions, patience is :1 skill-—it
does not come naturally. But nothing about power is natural; power is
more godlike than anything in the natural world. And patience is the
supreme virtue of the gods, who have nothing but time. Everything good
will happen——-the grass will grow again, if you give it time and see several
steps into the future. Impatience, on the other hand, only makes you look
weak. It is a. principal impediment to power.
Power is essentially amoral and one of the most important skills to ac~
quire is the ability to see circumstances rather than good or evil. Power is a
game—-this cannot be repeated too often—and in games you do not judge
your opponents by their intentions but by the effect of their actions. You
measure their strategy and their power by what you can see and feel. How
often are someone’s intentions made the issue only to cloud and deceive!
What does it matter if another player, your friend or rival, intended good
things and had only your interests at heart, ifthe effects of his action lead to
so much min and confusion? It is only natural for people to cover up their
actions with all kinds ofjustifications, always assuming that they have acted
out of goodness. You must learn to inwardly laugh each time you hear this
and never get caught up in gauging someone’s intentions and actions
through a set ofmoral judgments that are really an excuse for the accumulation of power.
It is a game. Your opponent sits opposite you. Both of you behave as
gentlemen or ladies, observing the rules of the game and taking nothing
personally. You play with a
strategy and you observe your opponent’s
moves with as much calmness as you can muster. In the end, you will appreciate the politeness of those you are playing with more than their good
and sweet intentions. Train your eye to follow the results of their moves,
the outward circumstances, and do not be distracted by anything else.
Half of your mastery of power comes from what you do not do, what
you do not allow yourself to get dragged into. For this skill you must learn
to judge all things by what they cost you. As Nietzsche wrote, “The value of
a
thing sometimes lies not in what one attains with it, but in what one pays
l
for it——what it costs us.” Perhaps you will attain your goal, and a worthy goal
at that, but at what price? Apply this standard to everything, including
whether to collaborate with other people or come to their aid. In the end,
PREFACE .
mi
xxii PREFACE
r“'"“”‘fi
life is short, opportunities are few, and you have only so much energy to
draw on. And in this sense time is as important a consideration as any
other. Never waste valuable time, or mental peace of mind, on the affairs of
others—that is too high a price to pay.
Power is a social game. To learn and master it, you must develop the
ability to study and understand people. As the great seventeenth-century
thinker and courtier Baltasar Gracién wrote: “Many people spend time
studying the properties of animals or herbs; how much more important it
would be to study those ofpeople, with whom we must live or die!” To be a
master player you must also be a master psychologist. You must recognize
motivations and see through the cloud of dust with which people surround
their actions. An understanding of people’s hidden motives is the single
greatest piece of knowledge you can have in acquiring power. It opens up
endless possibilities ofdeception, seduction, and manipulation.
People are of infinite complexity and you can spend a lifetime watching them without ever fully understanding them. So it is all the more important, then, to begin your education now. In doing so you must also keep
one principle in mind: Never discriminate as to whom you study and
whom you trust. Never trust anyone completely and study everyone, including friends and loved ones.
Finally, you must learn always to take the indirect route to power. Disguise your cunning. Like a billiard ball that caroms several times before it
hits its target, your moves must be planned and developed in the least ob
vious way. By training yourself to be indirect, you can thrive in the modern
court, appearing the paragon of decency while being the consummate manipulator.
Consider The 48 Laws ofPower a kind of handbook on the arts of indirec»
tion. The laws are based on the writings of men and women who have
studied and mastered the game of power. These writings span a period of
more than three thousand years and were created in civilizations as dis»
parate as ancient China and Renaissance Italy; yet they share common
threads and themes, together hinting at an essence of power that has yet to
be fully articulated. The 48 laws of power are the distillation of this accumulated wisdom, gathered from the writings of the most illustrious strate
gists (Sun-tzu, Clausewitz), statesmen (Bismarck, Talleyrand), courtiers
(Castiglione, Gracién), seducers (Ninon de Lenclos, Casanova), and con
artists (“Yellow Kid” Weil) in history.
The laws have a
simple premise: Certain actions almost always increase one’s power (the observance of the law), while others decrease it
and even ruin us (the transgression of the law). These transgressions and
observances are illustrated by historical examples. The laws are timeless
and definitive.
T7ze 48 Laws ofPower can be used in several ways. By reading the book
straight through you can learn about power in general. Although several of
the laws may seem not to pertain directly to your life, in time you will
probably find that all of them have some application, and that in fact they
are interrelated. By getting an overview of the entire subject you will best
be able to evaluate your own past actions and gain a greater degree of control over your immediate affairs. A thorough reading of the book will in»
spire thinking and reevaluation long after you finish it.
The book has also been designed for browsing and for examining the
law that seems at that particular moment most pertinent to you. Say you
are experiencing problems with a superior and cannot understand why
your efforts have not lead to more gratitude or a promotion. Several laws
specifically address the master-underling relationship, and you are almost
certainly transgressing one of them. By browsing the initial paragraphs for
the 48 laws in the table of contents, you can identify the pertinent law.
Finally, the book can be browsed through and picked apart for entertainrnent. for an enjoyable ride through the foibles and great deeds of our
predecessors in power. A warning, however, to those who use the book for
this purpose: It might be better to tum back. Power is endlessly seductive
and deceptive in its own way. It is a 1abyrinth—your mind becomes consumed with solving ifs infinite problems, and you soon realize how pleasantly lost you have become. In other words, it becomes most amusing by
taking it seriously. Do not be frivolous with such a critical matter. The gods
of power frown on the frivolous; they give ultimate satisfaction only to
those who study and reflect, and punish those who skim the surfaces looking for a good time.
Any man who tries to be good all the time is bound to come to ruin
among the great number who are not good. Hence :2 prince who wants
to keep his authority must [mm how not to be good, and use that
knowledge, or rgfiain wing it, as necessity requires.
THE PRINCE, Niu.-011) Machiavelli, 7469- 7527
PREFACE cmciii
LAW
I¢E\/EI{()[TTSI{IDJE
'TIIE B4AiYFEI{
JUDGMENT
Always make those shave yau feel comfartably superior
In your desim to ptease and impress them, do not go too
far in dispfaying your talents or you might accomplish
the o[)posite——inspire fear and insecurity. Make your
masters appear more brilliant than they are and you will
attain the heights ofpowen
9
LAW 1
TRANSCRESSION OF THE LAW
Nicolas Fouquet, Louis XIV’s finance minister in the first years of his reign,
was a
generous man who loved lavish parties, pretty women, and poetry.
He also loved money, for he led an extravagant lifestyle. Fouquet was
clever and very much indispensable to the king, so when the prime mim's—
ter, Jules Mazarin, died, in 1661, the finance minister expected to be
named the successor. Instead, the king decided to abolish the position. This
and other signs made Fouquet suspect that he was falling out of favor, and
so he decided to ingraliate himself with the king by staging the most spectacular party the world had ever seen. The party’s ostensible purpose
would be to commemorate the completion of Fouquet’s chateau, Vaux—leVicomte, but its real function was to pay tribute to the king, the guest of
honor.
The most brilliant nobility of Europe and some of the greatest minds
of the Iime—La Fontaine, La Rochefoucauld, Madame de Sévigné—
attended the party. Moliere wrote a play for the occasion, in which he
himself was to perform at the evening’s conclusion. The party began with a
lavish seven—course dinner, featuring foods from the Orient never before tasted in France, as well as new dishes created especially for the night.
The meal was accompanied with music commissioned by Fouquet to
honor the king.
After dinner there was a promenade through the chateau’s gardens.
The grounds and fountains of Vaux—le»Vicomte were to be the inspiration
for Versailles.
Fouquet personally accompanied the young king through the geometrically aligned arrangements of shrubbery and flower beds. Arriving at the
gardens’ canals, they witnessed a fireworks display, which was followed by
the performance of Moliere’s play. The party ran well into the night and
everyone agreed it was the most amazing affair they had ever attended.
The next day, Fouquet was arrested by the king’s head musketeer,
D’Artagna.n. Three months later he went on trial for stealing from the
country’s treasury. (Actually, most of the stealing he was accused of he had
done on the kings behalf and with the king’s permission.) Fouquet was
found guilty and sent to the most isolated prison in France, high in the
Pyrenees Mountains, where he spent the last twenty years of his life in solitary confinement.
Interpretation
Louis XIV, the Sun King, was a proud and arrogant man who wanted to be
the center of attention at all times; he could not countenance being outdone in lavishness by anyone, and certainly not his finance minister. To
succeed Fouquet, Louis chose _]ean—Baptiste Colbert, a man famous for his
parsimony and for giving the dullest parties in Paris. Colbert made sure
that any money liberated from the treasury went straight into Louis’s
hands. With the money, Louis built a palace even more magnificent than
Fouquet’s—the glorious palace of Versailles. He used the same architects,
decorators, and garden designer. And at Versailles, Louis hosted parties
even more extravagant than the one that cost Fouquet his freedom.
Let us examine the situation. The evening of the party, as Fouquet presented spectacle on spectacle to Louis, each more magnificent than the one
before, he imagined the affair as demonstrating his loyalty and devotion to
the king. Not only did he think the party would put him back in the king’s
favor, he thought it would show his good taste, his connections, and his
popularity, making him indispensable to the king and demonstrating that
he would make an excellent prime minister. Instead, however, each new
spectacle, each appreciative smile bestowed by the guests on Fouquet,
made it seem to Louis that his own friends and subjects were more
charmed by the finance minister than by the king himself, and that Fouquet
was actually flauming his wealth and power. Rather than flattering Louis
XXV, Fouquet’s elaborate party offended the king’s vanity. Louis would not
admit this to anyone, of course-—-instead, he found a convenient excuse to
rid himself of a man who had inadvertently made him feel insecure.
Such is the fate, in some form or other, of all those who unbalance the
master’s sense of self, poke holes in his vanity, or make him doubt his pro
eminence.
When the wming began, Fouquet was at the to}: ofthe world.
By the time it had ended, he was at the bottom.
Voltaire, 16.944 778
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
In the early 1600s, the Italian astronomer and mathematician Galileo
found himself in a precarious position. He depended on the generosity of
great rulers to support his research, and so, like all Renaissance scientists,
he would sometimes make gifts of his inventions and discoveries to the
leading patrons of the time. Once, for instance, he presented a militaiy
compass he had invented to the Duke of Gonzaga. Then he dedicated a
book explaining the use of the compass to the Medicis. Both rulers were
grateful, and through them Galileo was able to find more students to teach.
No matter how great the discovery, however, his patrons usually paid him
with gifts, not cash. This made for a life of constant insecurity and dependence. There must be an easier way, he thought.
Galileo hit on a new strategy in l6l0, when he discovered the moons
of Jupiter. Instead of dividing the discovery among his patrons—giving
one the telescope he had used, dedicating a book to another, and so on—as
he had done in the past, he decided to focus exclusively on the Medicis. He
chose the Medicis for one reason: Shortly after Cosimo I had established
the Medici dynasty, in 1540, he had made Jupiter, the mightiest of the
gods, the Medici symbol—a symbol of a. power that went beyond politics
and banking, one linked to ancient Rome and its divinities.
Galileo turned his discovery of _]upiter’s moons into a cosmic event
LAW 1 33
-1’
,
LAW]
honoring the Medicis’ greatness. Shortly after the discovery, he announced
that “the bright stars [the moons ofjupiterl offered themselves in the heav~
ens” to his telescope at the same time as Cosimo II’s enthronement. He
said that the number ofthe moons-—-four——harmonized with the number of
the Medicis (Cosimo II had three brothers) and that the moons orbitecl
Jupiter as these four sons revolved around Cosimo I, the dynasty’ s founder.
More than coincidence, this showed that the heavens themselves reflected
the ascendancy of the Medici family. After he dedicated the discovery to
the Medicis, Galileo commissioned an emblem representingJupiter sitting
on a cloud with the four stars circling about him, and presented this to
Cosimo II as a symbol of his link to the stars.
In 1610 Cosimo II made Galileo his official court philosopher and
mathematician, with a full salary. For a scientist this was the coup of a life»
time. The days ofbegging for patronage were over.
Interpretation
In one stroke, Galileo gained more with his new strategy than he had in
years of begging. The reason is simple: All masters want to appear more
brilliant than other people.
They do not care about science or empirical tmth or the latest inven~
tion; they care about their name and their glory. Galileo gave the Medicis
infinitely more glory by linking their name with cosmic forces them he had
by making them the patrons of some new scientific gadget or discovery.
Scientists are not spared the vagaries of court life and patronage. They
too must serve masters who hold the purse strings. And their great intellectual powers can make the master feel insecure, as if he were only there to
supply the funds~—an ugly, ignoble job. The producer of a great work
wants to feel he is more thanjust the provider of the financing. He wants to
appear creative and powerful, and also more important than the work pro~
duoed in his name. Instead of insecurity you must give him glory. Galileo
did not challenge the intellectual authority of the Medicis with his discov~
ery, or make them feel inferior in any way; by literally aligning them with
the stars, he made them shine brilliantly among the courts of Italy. He did
not outshine the master, he made the master outshine all others.
KEYS TO POWER
Everyone has insecurities. When you show yourself in the world and display your talents, you naturally stir up all kinds of resentment, envy, and
other manifestations of insecurity. This is to be expected. You cannot spend
your life worrying about the petty feelings of others. With those above you,
however, you must take a different approach: When it comes to power,
outshining the master is perhaps the worst mistake of all.
Do not fool yourself into thinking that life has changed much since the
days of Louis XIV and the Medicis. Those who attain high standing in life
are like kings and queens: They want to feel secure in their positions, and
superior to those around them in intelligence, wit, and charm. It is a. deadly
but common misperception to believe that by displaying and vaunting
your gifts and talents, you are winning the master’s affection. He may feign
appreciation, but at his first opportunity he will replace you with someone
less intelligent, less attractive, less threatening, just as Louis XIV replaced
the sparkling Fouquet with the bland Colbert. And as with Louis, he will
not admit the tmth, but will find an excuse to rid himself of your presence.
This Law involves two rules that you must realize, First, you can inadvertently outshine a master simply by being yourself. There are masters
who are more insecure than others, nronstrously insecure; you may naturally outshine them by your charm and grace.
No one had more natural talents than Astorre Manfredi, prince of
Faenza. The most handsome of all the young princes of Italy, he captivated
his subjects with his generosity and open spirit.
In the year 1500, Cesare Borgia laid siege to Faenza. When the city
surrendered, the citizens expected the worst from the cruel Borgia, who,
however, decided to spare the town: He simply occupied its fortress, executed none of its citizens, and allowed Prince Manfredi, eighteen at the
time, to remain with his court, in complete freedom.
A few weeks later, though, soldiers hauled Astorre Manfredi away to a
Roman prison. A year after that, his body was fished out of the River
Tiber, a stone tied around his neck. Borgiajustified the horrible deed with
some sort of tmmped~up charge of treason and conspiracy, but the real
problem was that he was notoriously vain and insecure. The young man
was outshining him without even trying. Given Manfredi’s natural talents,
the prince’s mere presence made Borgia seem less attractive and charismatic. The lesson is simple: If you cannot help being charming and supe~
not, you must learn to avoid sud: monsters of vanity. Either that, or find a
way to mute your good qualities when in the company of a Cesare Borgia.
Second, never imagine that because the master loves you, you can do
anything you want. Entire books could be written about favorites who fell
out of favor by taking their status for granted, for daring to outshine. In
late-sixteentbcenturyjapan, the favorite ofEmperor Hideyoshi was a man
called Sen no Rikyu. The premier artist of the tea ceremony, which had become an obsession with the nobility, he was one of Hideyoshi’s most
trusted advisers, had his own apartment in the palace, and was honored
throughout japan. Yet in 1591, Hideyoshi had him arrested and sentenced
to death. Rikyu took his own life, instead. The cause for his sudden change
of fortune was discovered later: It seems that Rikyu, former peasant and
later court favorite, had had a wooden statue made of himself wearing sandals (a Sign of nobility) and posing loftily. He had had this statue placed in
the most important temple inside the palace gates, in clear sight ofthe royalty who often would pass by. To Hidcyoshi this signified that Rikyu had
no sense of limits. Presurning that he had the same rights as those of the
highest nobility, he had forgotten that his position depended on the em»
peror, and had come to believe that he had earned it on his own. This was
LAW 1
6 LAW 1
an unforgivable miscalculation of his own importance and he paid for it
with his life. Remember the following: Never take your position for
granted and never let any favors you receive go to your head.
Knowing the dangers ofoutshining your master, you can turn this Law
to your advantage. First you must flatter and puff up your master. Overt
flattery can be effective but has its limits; it is too direct and obvious, and
looks bad to other courtiers. Discreet flattery is much more powerful. If
you are more intelligent than your master, for example, seem the opposite:
Make him appear more intelligent than you. Act naive. Make it seem that
you need his expertise. Commit harmless mistakes that will not hurt you in
the long run but will give you the chance to ask for his help. Masters adore
such requests. A master who cannot bestow on you the of his experience may direct rancor and ill will at you instead.
If your ideas are more creative than your master’s, ascribe them to
him, in as public a manner as possible. Make it clear that your advice is
merely an echo of his advice.
If you surpass your master in wit, it is okay to play the role of the court
jester, but do not make him appear cold and surly by comparison. Tone
down your humor if necessary, and find ways to make him seem the dispenser of amusement and good cheer. If you are naturally more sociable
and generous than your master, be careful not to be the cloud that blocks
his radiance from others. He must appear as the sun around which everyone revolves, radiating power and brilliance, the center of attention. If you
are thrust into the position of entertaining him, a display of your limited
means may win you his sympathy. Any attempt to impress him with your
grace and generosity can prove fatal: Learn from Fouquet or pay the price.
In all of these cases it is not a weakness to disguise your strengths if
in the end they lead to power. By letting others outshine you, you remain
in control, instead of being a victim of their insecurity. This will all come in
handy the day you decide to rise above your inferior status. If, like Galileo,
you can make your master shine even more in the eyes of others, then you
are a godsend and you will be instantly promoted.
Image:
The Stars in the
Sky. There can be only
one sun at a time. Never
obscure the sunlight, or
rival the sun's brilliance‘,
rather, fade into the sky and
find ways to heighten
the master star’s
intensity.
Authority: Avoid outsliining the master. All superiority is odious, but the
superiority of a subject over his prince is not only stupid, it. is fatal. This is a
lesson that the stars in the sky Leach us-—--they may be related to the sun,
and just as brilliant, but they never appear in her company. (Baltasar
Grzutifm, llilll-I658}
REVERSAI.
You cannot worry about upsetting every person you come across, but you
must be selectively cruel. If your superior is a
falling star, there is nothing
to fear from outshining him. Do not be merciful-—-your master had no such
scruples in his own cold—blooded climb to the top. Gauge his strength. If he
is weak, discreetly hasten his downfall: Outclo, outchann, outsmart him at
key moments. If he is very weak and ready to fall, let nature take its course.
Do not risk outshining a feeble superior--it might appear cruel or spiteful.
But if your master is firm in his position, yet you know yourself to be the
more capable, hide your time and be patient. It is the natural course of
things that power eventually fades and weakens. Your master will fall
someday, and if you play it right, you will outlive and someday outshine
him.
LAW 1 z
LAW
NEVER PUT TOO MUCH
TRUST IN FRIENDS, LEARN
HOW TO USE ENEMIES
JUD GMENT
Be wary zyffn'emds-they will betray you more quickly, for
they are easily aroused to envy. They also became spaileri
and tyrannical. But hive afmmer enemy and he will be
mofre loyal than a
fiimd, because he has more to pmve.
Infact, you have mam tofearfmmfviemls thanfivm en—
emies. Ifyou have no emmnies, find a may to make them.
TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW
In the mid—ninth century A.l.)., a
young man named Michael III assumed
the throne of the Byzantine Empire. His mother, the Empress Theodora,
had been banished to a nunnery, and her lover, Theoctistus, had been murdered; at the head of the conspiracy to depose Theodora and enthrone
Michael had been Michael’s uncle, Bardas, a man ofintelligence and a:mbi~
tion. Michael was now a
young, inexperienced ruler, surrounded by in»
triguers, murderers, and profligates. In this time of peril he needed
someone he could trust as his councillor, and his thoughts turned to Basil~
ius, his best friend. Basilius had no experience whatsoever in government
and politics——-in fact, he was the head of the royal stables——buI he had
proven his love and gratitude time and again.
They had met a few years before, when Michael had been visiting the
stables just as a wild horse got loose. Basilius, a. young groom from peasant
Macedonian stock, had saved Michael’s life. The gmom’s strength and
courage had impressed Michael, who immediately raised Basilius from the
obscurity of being a horse trainer to the position of head of the stables. He
loaded his friend with gifts and favors and they became inseparable. Basilius was sent to the finest school in Byzantium, and the crude peasant be—
came a cultured and sophisticated courtier.
Now Michael was emperor, and in need of someone loyal. Who could
he better trust with the post of chamberlain and chief councillor than a
young man who owed him everything?
Basilius could be trained for the job and Michael loved him like a
brother. Ignoring the advice of those who recommended the much more
qualified Bardas, Michael chose his friend.
Basilius learned well and was soon advising the emperor on all matters
of state. The only problem seemed to be money-——Basilius never had
enough. Exposure to the splendor ofByzantine court life made him avaricious for the perks of power. Michael doubled, then tripled his salary, ennobled him, and married him off to his own mistress, Eudoxia Ingerina.
Keeping such a trusted friend and adviser satisfied was worth any price.
But more trouble was to come. Bardas was now head of the army, and
Basilius convinced Michael mat the man was hopelessly ambitious. Under
the illusion that he could control his nephew, Bardas had conspired to put
him on the throne, and he could conspire again, this time to get rid of
Michael and assume the crown himself. Basilius poured poison into
Michael’s ear until the emperor agreed to have his uncle murdered. During
a great horse race, Basilius closed in on Bardas in the crowd and stabbed
him to death. Soon after, Basilius asked that he replace Bardas as head of
the army, where he could keep control of the realm and quell rebellion.
This was granted.
Now Basilius’s power and wealth only grew, and a few years later
Michael, in financial straits from his own extravagance, asked him to pay
back some of the money he had borrowed over the years. To Michael’s
shock and astonishment, Basilius refused, with a look of such impudence
To have a good enemy,
choose a
/rierld.' He
knows where to mike.
DIANE DE Pomrns,
l499~»l566, Mismess or
HENRI II or Fnawcr,
Every mm: I bestow a
vacant ajffice :7 make 52
hundred discontented
persons and one
ingraze.
LOUIS XIV, 1638-1715
Thus for my own part
I have more than omze
been (leroived by the
person I loved moss
and of whose love.
above‘ everyone else Cr,
I have been most r:/on}?
denr. So that Ibelieve
that it may be/viggizt to
love arzd¥€efi‘/re one
person above all others,
according to merit and
worth. but never to
trust .\'0 much in this
tempting trap of/'n'emlship as to have cause to
repent ofit later an.
BALDASSARF,
CASTIGLIONE,
1*-178452‘)
LAW 2 9
rt
|'| Ha
>.\,\|\l2 |‘l ll-.
\l{Mlxlt. »\\l)‘l‘Hl“
é€|<1R()\
/\ make chased by
Imnteris as/(ed a
furrrwr
In lave ifs life. To hide it
from its pur.\'uer.\; the
finmer .aqna£te(l amt lei
(hr Snake crawl inn) his
belly Bu! when the
tlangttr had pasxswl and
the [unuer cwketl the
snake to coma out. zhe
xnake rrfusml. Ir was
warm and safiz inside.
On his way harm», the
/7um saw a heron and
worn‘ up :0 him and
whispered what had
huppemerl. Tim heron
told him to mud: and
smzin to eject the
make. When the snake
snm;k its head (ml, the
heron caughl it. pulled it
our, and killed it. The
former was worried that
the makfs polxrzn
Inighl will be inside
him, and the heron
told him (ha! the Lure
for snakz’ poison was
to cook and eat sit
white fowl.
“
You ‘re
(1 while fowl, "
.\'(Ii(l Y h a farmer.
"You'll do far a
start.
”
He grabbed
the’ heron. put it in at
bag,
h 0
and carried it
me, where he
hung 2'! up while he
told his wife whal
had happened.
"I'm surprised at
you,
"
suit! the wife.
"The hird timer
you a kimlrms‘.
rizls you ofthv evil
in your belly,
.save.\‘ your Ilia in
fact, yet you
(arch if tmcl talk
of killing it."
She immediate!) J releaxetl
the henm, and
it flew
3 ul 0
away.
n its
way, it gouged
out her eyes.
M0 7 at‘;
When you
.\'(’(:' water
/
l 0 w i n g
1:phiIl , it
m€u!’LS‘ that
that the emperor suddenly realized his predicament: The former stable
boy had more money, more allies in the army and senate, and in the end
more power than the emperor himself. A few weeks later, after a night of
heavy drinking, Michael awoke to find himself surrounded by soldiers.
Basilius watched as they stabbed the emperor to death. Then, after proclaiming himself emperor, he rode his horse through the streets of Byzantium, brandishing the head of his former benefactor and best friend at the
end of a
long pike.
Interpretation
Michael III staked his future on the sense of gratitude he thought Basilius
must feel for him. Surely Basilius would serve him best; he owed the emperor his wealth, his education, and his position. Then, once Basilius was in
power, anything he needed it was best to give to him, strengthening the
bonds between the two men. It was only on the fateful day when the emperor saw that impudent smile on Basilius’s face that he realized his deadly
mistake.
He had created a monster. He had allowed a man to see power up
close-—a man who then wanted more, who asked for anything and got it,
who felt encumbered by the charity he had received and simply did what
many people do in such a situation: They forget the favors they have received and imagine they have earned their success by their own merits.
At Michael’s moment ofrealization, he could still have saved his own
life, but friendship and love blind every man to their interests. Nobody be—
Iieves a friend can betray. And Michael went on disbelieving until the day
his head ended up on a pike.
Lord, protect mefrum my friends; I can take care qf my enemies.
Volmlre, 1694-1778
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
For several centuries after the fall of the Han Dynasty {A.D. 222}, Chinese history followed the same pattern of violent and bloody coups, one after the
other. Army men would plot to kill a weak emperor, then would replace him
on the Dragon Throne with a
strong general. The general would start a new
dynasty and crown himselfemperor; to ensure his own survival he would kill
offhis fellow generals. A few years later, however, the pattern would resume:
New generals would rise up and assassinate him or his sons in their turn. To
be emperor of China was to be alone, surrounded by a pack of enemies—it
was the least powerful, least secure position in the realm.
In A.D. 959, General Chao K’uang—yin became Emperor Sung. He
knew the adds, the probability that within a
year or two he would be murdered; how could he break the pattern? Soon after becoming emperor,
Sung ordered a banquet to celebrate the new dynasty, and invited the most
powerful commanders in the army. After they had drunk much wine, he
somcrmc is repaying or kirzrlnmzxt
AFRICAN /-‘oz./4 1;: LE
dismissed the guards and everybody else except the generals, who now
feared he would murder them in one fell swoop. Instead, he addressed
them: “The whole day is spent in fear, and I am unhappy both at the table
and in my bed. For which one of you does not dream of ascending the
throne? I do not doubt your allegiance, but if by some chance your subordinates, seeking wealth and position, were to force the emperor’s yellow
robe upon you in turn, how could you refuse it?” Drunk and tearing for
their lives, the generals proclaimed their innocence and their loyalty. But
Sung had other ideas: “The best way to pass one’s days is in peaceful en~
joyment of riches and honor. If you are willing to give up your commands,
I am ready to provide you with line estates and beautiful dwellings where
you may take your pleasure with singers and girls as your companions.”
The astonished generals realized that instead of a life of anxiety and
struggle Sung was offering them riches and security. The next day, all of
the generals tendered their resignations, and they retired as nobles to the
estates that Sung bestowed on them.
In one stroke, Sung turned a pack of “friendly” wolves, who would
likely have betrayed him, into a
group of docile lambs, fax from all power.
Over the next few years Sung continued his campaign to secure his
rule. In A.D. 971, King Lin of the Southern Han finally surrendered to him
after years ofrebellion. To Liu’s astonishment, Sung gave him a rank in the
imperial court and invited him to the palace to seal their newfound friendship with wine. As King Liu took the glass that Sung offered him, he hesitated, fearing it contained poison. “Your subject’s crimes certainly merit
death,” he cried out, “but I beg Your Majesty to spare your subject’s life. Indeed I dare not drink this wine.” Emperor Sung laughed, took the glass
from Lin, and swallowed it himself. There was no poison. From then on
Liu became his most trusted and loyal friend.
At the time, China had splintered into many smaller kingdoms. When
Ch’ien Shu, the king of one of these, was defeated, Sung’s ministers advised the emperor to lock this rebel up. They presented documents proving that he was still conspiring to kill Sung. When Ch’ien Shu came to visit
the emperor, however, instead of locking him up, Sung honored him. He
also gave him a package, which he told the former king to open when he
was halfway home. Ch’ien Shu opened the bundle on his return journey
and saw that it contained all the papers documenting his conspiracy. He realized that Sung knew of his murderous plans, yet had spared him nonetheless. This generosity won him over, and he too became one ofSung’s most
loyal vassals.
Interpretation
A Chinese proverb compares friends to the jaws and teeth of a dangerous
animal: If you are not careful, you will find them chewing you up. Emperor
Sung knew the jaws he was passing between when he assumed the throne:
His “friends” in the army would chew him up like meat, and if he somehow survived, his “friends” in the government would have him for supper.
'1‘/iere are rmmy who
think zlzerefizre thzu a
wise prince ought,
when he has the
chance, 10 form-m
astzarely some cnmizy,
so that by rlcpprmirirzg
it he willu1:gn1mtl1is'
_ur4m(nm-.s‘. f’rin«'ex, and
espwizzlly new ones,
have found more fair/1
and more uxejiilmzss in
those men. whom :11 the
bcgimiing oftheir
power they regarded
with ruspicimi. than in
those they tztfirsl
confided in. Pandolfo
}’c'lru<::'i, primte nf
Stems. gm-‘Billed his
State more by Iiwse
it-liom he sltspecrezi
[Iran by oilzers.
Nxcrtnt) NlACHl.-\\‘l;‘LLL
ls:l6‘J- ) 527
A brahmzm. a great
expert in Veda who has
become a great archer
as well, offers his
.s‘t?rL'It'(,'.\' Ir) Iris grmrl
frimd, who is now the
king. The hruhrn/In
tries am when he sees
I/14’ king, "kemgnize
me, yu1u'V/"/'z'cm1.r"’T/u’
king atzswers /rim with
comempt and than
t'.\‘[)1l1iI1S."‘YL'.V, we wcna
fricm1.\' Iznfrme, but our
friewzis/1/p war based
[NZ lvlltll [1(7Mv’6’)' WP
had. . . . I w:1rfrie'nzI.s'
with van. good
hmhnmn. hecttmsv it
served my purpose. No
pauper is friend to the
rich. no fool to the
wisr. no rmvzml to rim
LAW 2 II
brave. An, Old friim/I-—
who needs him? It is
two men ofeqnal
wealth and equal birth
who rmi1racrfrier1dship and marriage, not
(1 rich man and (I
pauper. . . ./in old
friend—- who needs
him?
‘i Hi-, MAHABH.IxRA’lA,
I". rnum L:«_=N'r1;RY ac.
Pick up n beefrom
klIH]I1E‘S,\‘, and learn (he
liIm'ruIlrm.i u/‘kindmzws.
SIIH PR()VEl{l.i
M(III are mun! remly ll)
repay an injury than a
bz:ru:j7‘t, Iwmme grillitude is £1‘ burden and
revenge it pleasme.
T.-ugnus, c. An 55-420
1.‘) LAW 2
Emperor Sung would have no truck with “friends”—-he bribed his fellow
generals with splendid estates and kept them far away. This was a much
better way to emasculate them than killing them, which would only have
led other generals to seek vengeance. And Sung would have nothing to do
with “friendly” ministers. More often than not, they would end up drinking
his famous cup ofpoisoned wine.
Instead of relying on friends, Sung used his enemies, one after the
other, transforming them into far more reliable subjects. While a friend expects more and more favors, and seethes with jealousy, these former £:ne~
mies expected nothing and got everything. A man suddenly spared the
guillotine is a grateful man indeed, and will go to the ends of the earth for
the man who has pardoned him. In time, these former enemies became
Sung’s most trusted friends.
And Sung was finally able to break the pattern of coups, violence, and
civil war—the Sung Dynasty ruled China for more than three hundred
years.
In a speech Abraham Lincoln delivererl at the height ofthe (Ii:/il War,
he referred to the Southerners as
_ fellow human beings who were in
error. An elderly lady chastised himfor not calling them irremncilable
enemies who must be destroyed. “Why, madam,”L2'ncoln replied,
“do I not destroy my enemies when I make them myfr2Tends?”
KEYS TO POWER
It is natural to want to employ your friends when you find yourself in times
of need. The world is a harsh place, and your friends soften the harshness.
Besides, you know them. ‘Why depend on a stronger when you have a
friend at hand?
The problem is that you often do not know your friends as well as you
imagine. Friends often agree on things in order to avoid an argument.
They cover up their unpleasant qualifies so as to not offend each other.
They laugh extra hard at each other’s jokes. Since honesty rarely strengthens friendship, you may never know how a friend tmly feels. Friends will
say that they love your poetry, adore your music, envy your taste in
clothes———maybe they mean it, often they do not.
When you decide to hire a
friend, you gradually discover the qualities
he or she has kept hidden. Strangely enough, it is your act of kindness that
unbalances everything. People want to feel they deserve their good fortune. The receipt of a favor can become oppressive: It means you have
been chosen because you are a
friend, not necessarily because you are do
serving. There is almost a touch of condescension in the act of hiring
friends that secretly afflicts them. The injury will come out slowly: A little
more honesty, flashes of resentment and envy here and there, and before
you know it your friendship fades. The more favors and gifts you supply to
revive the friendship, the less gratitude you receive.
Ingratitude has along and deep history. It has demonstrated its powers
for so many centuries, that it is truly amazing that people continue to un
derestimate them. Better to be wary. If you never expect gratitude from a
friend, you will be pleasantly surprised when they do prove grateful.
The problem with using or hiring friends is that it will inevitably limit
your power. The friend is rarely the one who is most able to help you; and
in the end, skill and competence are far more important than friendly feelings. (Michael Ill had a man right under his nose who would have steered
him right and kept him alive: That man was Bardas.)
All working situations require a kind of distance between people. You
are trying to work, not make friends; friendliness (real or false) only ob
scores that fact. The key to power, then, is the ability to judge who is best
able to further your interests in all situations. Keep friends for friendship,
but work with the skilled and competent.
Your enemies, on the other hand, are an untapped gold mine that you
must learn to exploit. When Talleyrancl, Napc-leon’s foreign minister, decided in 1807 that his boss was leading France to ruin, and the time had
come to turn against him, he understood the dangers of conspiring against
the emperor; he needed a partner, a confederate-——-what friend could he
trust in such a project? He chose Joseph Fouché, head of the secret police,
his most hated enemy, a man who had even tried to have him assassinated.
He knew that their former hatred would create an opportunity for an emo~
tional reconciliation. He knew that Fouché would expect nothing from
him, and in fact would work to prove that he was worthy of Talleyra.nd’s
choice; a
person who has something to prove will move mountains for you.
Finally, he knew that his relationship with Fouché would be based on mutual selfiinterest, and would not be contaminated by personal feeling. The
selection proved perfect; although the conspirators did not succeed in toppling Napoleon, the union of such powerful but unlikely partners generated much interest in the cause; opposition to the emperor slowly began to
spread. And from then on, Talleyi-and and Fouché had a. fruitful working
relationship. Whenever you can, bury the hatchet with an enemy, and
make a point ofputting him in your service.
V
As Lincoln said, you destroy an enemy when you make a friend of
him. In 1971, during the Vietnam War, Henry Kissinger was the target of
an unsuccessful kidnapping attempt, a
conspiracy involving, among others,
the renowned antiwar activist priests the Berrigan brothers, four more
Catholic priests, and four nuns. In private, without informing the Secret
Service or the justice Department, Kissinger arranged a Saturday-morning
meeting with three of the alleged kidnappers. Explaining to his guests that
he would have most American soldiers out of Vietnam by mid-1972, he
completely charmed them. They gave him some “Kidnap Kissinger” but»
tons and one of them remained a friend of his for years, visiting him on
several occasions. This was not just 8. onetime ploy: Kissinger made a policy of working with those who disagreed with him. Colleagues commented
that he seemed to get along better with his enemies than with his friends.
Without enemies around us, we grow lazy. An enemy at our heels
sharpens our wits, keeping us focused and alert. It is sometimes better,
l‘li()l‘l'l'l\A'» l\l\' til If
I'.\l.\1||2$
King Iliero clumceri
upon it time. .vpeakin_;,r
with one ()f]‘1tS
enemies. to be told in a
rrproacliful rmzrzrmr
that he had stinking
brculli. lrV/wrc’upon the
good kmg, bring somewhrzz di.9:rza_wd in
Izim.ve‘I/I as soon as he
mtlrrnmi hanw chided
his wife, “How does it
Imppm Ihm you never
told me 0/‘this pm!»
(em? "
The wonum.
bring a simple. chrlsir,
um! hrrwnivss rlame,
Said. “Sir, I /um’ thought
all max k lmazniz imri
smaller! so.
"
Thus it is
plain that faults that
are evzdml lo the
senses. gross‘ and
corpu/'u!, or otherwise
noiorrous tn the world.
we know by our
e'm°mim Sooner than
by um'frieml.s and
familiar;
PLUTARCII.
c. A.I). 46-120
LAW 2 13
14 LAW 2
then, to use enemies as enemies rather than transforming them into friends
or allies.
Mao Tse-tung saw conflict as key in his approach to power. In 1937 the
Japanese invaded China, i.nte.rrupi:i:ug the aim‘! war between Mods Communists and their enemy, the Nationalists.
Fearing that the Japanese would wipe them out, some Communist
leaders advocated leaving the Nationalists to fight the Japanese, and using
the time to recuperate. Mao disagreed: The Japanese could not possibly
defeat and occupy a vast country like China for long. Once they left, the
Communists would have grown rusty if they had been out of combat for
several years, and would be ill prepared to reopen their struggle with the
Nationalists. To fight a formidable foe like the Japanese, in fact, would be
the perfect training for the Communists’ ragtag army. Mao’s plan was
adopted, and it worked: By the time the Japanese finally retreated, the
Communists had gained the fighting experience that helped them defeat
the Nationalists.
Years later, aJapanese visitor tried to apologize to Mao for his country’s invasion of China. Mao interrupted, “Should I not thank you in»
stead?” Without a worthy opponent, he explained, a man or group cannot
grow stronger.
Mao’s strategy of constant conflict has several key components. First,
be certain that in the long run you will emerge victorious. Never pick a
fight with someone you are not sure you can defeat, as Mao knew the
Japanese would be defeated in time. Second, if you have no apparent enemies, you must sometimes set up a convenient target, even turning a friend
into an enemy. Mao used this tactic time and again in politics. Third, use
such enemies to define your cause more clearly to the public, even framing
it as a
struggle of good against evil. Mao actually encouraged Chi.na’s dis
agreements with the Soviet Union and the United States; without clear-cut
enemies, he believed, his people would lose any sense of what Chinese
Communism meant A sharply defined enemy is a far stronger argument
for your side than all the words you could possibly put together.
Never let the presence of enemies upset or distress you—you are far
better off with a declared opponent or two than not knowing where your
real enemies lie. The man of power welcomes conflict, using enemies to
enhance his reputation as a surefoobed fighter who can be relied upon in
times of uncertainty.
Image: The jaws of Ingrzttitude.
Knowing what would happen
if you put a
finger in
the mouth of a lion,
you would stay
clear of it.
VVith friends
you will have
no such caution, and
if you hire them, they will
eat you alive with ingratitude.
A u t h o r i
ty :
Know how to use
enemies for your own
profit. You must learn to grab at
sword not by its blade, which would
cut you, but by the handle, which allows
you to defend yourself. The wise man
profits more from his enemies,
than a fool from his friends.
(BaltasarGraciz'1n,
1 6 0 1
—
1 6 5 8)
REVERSAL
Although it is generally best not to mix work with friendship, there are
times when a friend can be used to greater effect than an enemy. A man of
power, for example, often has dirty work that has to be done, but for the
sake of appearances it is generally preferable to have other people do it for
him; friends often do this the best, since their afiection for him makes them
willing to take chances. Also, if your plans go awry for some reason, you
can use a friend as a convenient scapegoat. This “fall of the favorite” was a
trick often used by kings and sovereigns: They would let their closest friend
at court take the fall for a mistake, since the public would not believe that
they would deliberately sacrifice a friend for such a
purpose. Of course,
after you play that card, you have lost your friend forever. It is best, then, to
reserve the scapegoat role for someone who is close to you but not too
close.
Finally, the problem about working with friends is that it confuses the
boundaries and distances that working requires. But if both partners in the
arrangement understand the dangers involved, a friend often can be employed to great effect. You must never let your guard down in such a venture, however; always be on the lookout for any signs of emotional
disturbance such as envy and ingratitude. Nothing is stable in the realm of
power, and even the closest of friends can be transformed into the worst of
enernies.
LAW 2 15
16
LAW
CONCEAL YOUR
INTENTIONS
JUD GMENT
Keep people ojfbalancc and in the dark by never revealing the purpose behind your actions. Ifthey have no clue
what you are up to, they cannot prepmzz cl defense. Guide
them far enough down the wrong path, mzrelop them in
enough smoke, and by the time they realize your intentions, it will be too late.
PART I: USE DECOYED OBJECTS OF DESIRE AND RED
HERRINGS TO THROW PEOPLE OFF THE SCENT
Ifat any point in the deception you practicepeople have the slightest suspieion as to your intentions, all is lost. Do not give them the chance to sense
what you are up to: Throw them off the seen! by dragging ml herrings
across the path. Use false sincerity, send ambiguous signals, set up mis—
leading objects 0}’ desire. Unable to distinguish the genuinefmm thefalse,
thrgr ccmnatpick out your vealgoal.
TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW
Over several weeks, Ninon de Lenclos, the most infamous courtesan of
seventeentlrcentury France, listened patiently as the Marquis de Sevigné
explained his struggles in pursuing a beautiful but difficult young countess.
Ninon was sixty~two at the time, and more than experienced in matters of
love; the marquis was a lad of twenty-two, handsome, dashing, but hope
lessly inexperienced in romance. At first Ninon was amused to hear the
marquis talk about his mistakes, but finally she had had enough. Unable to
bear ineptitude in any realm, least of all in seducing a woman, she decided
to take the young man under her wing. First, he had to understand that this
was war, and that the beautiful countess was {citadel to which he had to
lay siege as carefully as any general. Every step had to be planned and executed with the utmost attention to detail and nuance.
Instructing the marquis to start over, Ninon told him to approach the
countess with a bit of distance, an air of nonchalance. The next time the
two were alone together, she said, he would confide in the countess as
would a friend but notva potential lover. This was to throw her off the scent.
The countess was no longer to take his interest in her for granted-perhaps
he was only interested in friendship.
Ninon planned ahead. Once the countess was confused, it would be
time to make herjealous. At the next encounter, at a major féte in Paris, the
marquis would show up with a beautiful young woman at his side. This
beautiful young woman had equally beautiful friends, so that wherever the
countess would now see the marquis, he would be surrounded by the most
stunning young women in Paris. Not only would the countess be seething
with jealousy, she would come to see the marquis as someone who was desired by others. It was hard for Ninon to make the marquis understand, but
she patiently explained that a woman who is interested in a man wants to
see that other women are interested in him, too. Not only does that give
him instant value, it makes it all the more satisfying to snatch him from
their clutches.
Once the countess was jealous but intrigued, it would be time to beguile her. On Ninon’s instructions, the marquis would fail to show up at affairs where the countess expected to see him. Then, suddenly, he would
appear at salons he had never frequented before, but that the countess atLAW 3 I7
18 LAW 3
tended often. She would be unable to predict his moves. All of this would
push her into the state of emotional confusion that is a prerequisite for sum
cessful seduction.
These moves were executed, and took several weeks. Ninon monitored the marquis’s progress: Through her network of spies, she heard how
the countess would laugh a little harder at his witticisms, listen more
closely to his stories. She heard that the countess was suddenly asking questions about him. Her friends told her that at social affairs the countess
would often look up at the marquis, following his steps. Ninon felt certain
that the young woman was falling under his spell. It was a matter of weeks
now, maybe a month or two, but if all went smoothly, the citadel would
fall.
A few days later the marquis was at the countess’s home. They were
alone. Suddenly he was a different man: This time acting on his own im—
pulse, rather than following Ninon’s instructions, he took the countess’s
hands and told her he was in love with her. The young woman seemed
confused, 3 reaction he did not expect. She became polite, then excused
herself. For the rest of the evening she avoided his eyes, was not there to
say goodnight to him. The next few times he visited he was told she was
not at home. When she finally admitted him again, the two felt awkward
and uncomfortable with each other. The spell was broken.
Interpretation
Ninon de Lenclos knew everything about the art of love. The greatest writers, thinkers, and politicians of the time had been her lovers——men like La
Rochefoucauld, Moliére, and Richelieu. Seduction was a
game to her, to be
practiced with skill. As she got older, and her reputation grew, the most im~
portant families in France would send their sons to her to be instructed in
matters of love.
Ninon knew that men and women are very different, but when it
comes to seduction they feel the same: Deep down inside, they often sense
when they are being seduced, but they give in because they enjoy the feeling ofbeing led along. It is a pleasure to let go, and to allow the other person to detour you into a strange country. Everything in seduction,
however, depends on suggestion. You cannot announce your intentions or
reveal them directly in words. Instead you must throw your targets off the
scent. To surrender to your guidance they must be appropriately confused.
You have to scramble your signals——~appea.r interested in another man or
woman (the decoy), then hint at being interested in the target, then feign
indifference, on and on. Such patterns not only confuse, they excite.
Imagine this story from the countess’s perspective: After a few of the
marquis’s moves, she sensed the marquis was playing some sort of game,
but the game delighted her. She did not know where he was leading her,
but so much the better. His moves intrigued her, each of them keeping her
waiting for the next one———she even enjoyed herjealousy and confusion, for
sometimes any emotion is be-tier than the boredom of security. Perhaps the
marquis had ulterior motives; most men do. But she was willing to wait and
see, and probably if she had been made to wait long enough, what he was
up to would not have mattered.
The moment the marquis uttered that fatal word “love,” however, all
was changed. This was no longer a
game with moves, it was an artless show
of passion. His intention was revealed: He was seducing her. This put
everything he had done in a new light. All that before had been charming
now seemed ugly and conniving; the countess felt embarrassed and used.
A door closed that would never open again.
Do not be held a cheat, even though 2'! is impossible to live today without being one.
Let your greatest cunning lie in covering up what looks like cunning.
l:ia.lm.s'm (}rzu‘iz1u., I 6 /)1 I6 58
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
In 1850 the young Otto von Bismarck, then a
thirty—five—yearvold deputy in
the Prussian parliament, was at a
turning point in his career. The issues of
the day were the unification of the many states (including Prussia) into
which Germany was then divided, and a war against Austria, the powerful
neighbor to the south that hoped to keep the Germans weak and at odds,
even threatening to intervene if they tried to unite. Prince William, next in
line to be P:ussia’s king, was in favor of going to war, and the parliament
rallied to the cause, prepared to back any mobilization of troops. The only
ones to oppose war were the present king, Frederick William IV, and his
ministers, who preferred to appease the powerful Austrians.
Throughout his career, Bismarck had been a
loyal, even passionate
supporter of Prussian might and power. He dreamed of German unification, of going to war against Austria and humiliating the country that for so
long had kept Germany divided. A former soldier, he saw warfare as a glorious business.
This, after all, was the man who years later would say, “The great
questions of the time will be decided, not by speeches and resolutions, but
by iron and blood.”
Passionate patriot and lover of military glory, Bismarck nevertheless
gave a speech in parliament at the height of the war fever that astonished
all who heard it “Woe unto the statesman,” he said, “who makes war without a reason that will still be valid when the war is over! After the war, you
will all look differently at these questions. Will you then have the courage
to turn to the peasant contemplating the ashes of his farm, to the man who
has been crippled, to the father who has lost his children?” Not only did
Bismarck go on to talk of the madness of this war, but, strangest of all, he
praised Austria and defended her actions. This went against everything he
had stood for. The consequences were immediate. Bismarck was against
the wa.r——what could this possibly mean? Other deputies were confused,
and several of them changed their votes. Eventually the king and his ministers won out, and war was averted.
A few weeks after Bisma.rck’s infamous speech, the king, grateful that
LAW 3 19
20 LAW 3
he had spoken for peace, made him a cabinet minister. A few years later he
became the Prussian premier. In this role he eventually led his country and
a. peace-loving king into a war against Austria, crushing the former empire
and establishing a German state, with Prussia at its head.
lnterpretation
At the time of his speech in 1850, Bismarck made several calculations.
First, he sensed that the Prussian military, which had not kept pace with
other European armies, was unready for war--that Austria, in fact, might
very well win, a disastrous result for the future. Second, ifthe war were lost
and Bismarck had supported it, his career would be gravely jeopardized.
The king and his conservative ministers wanted peace; Bismarck wanted
power. The answer was to throw people off the scent by supporting a cause
he cletested, saying things he would laugh at if said by another. A whole
country was fooled. It was because ofBismarck’s speech that the king made
him a minister, at position from which he quickly rose to be prime minister,
attaining the power to strengthen the Prussian military and accomplish
what he had wanted all along: the humiliation of Austria and the unifica»
tion of Germany under Prussia’s leadership.
Bismarck was certainly one of the cleverest statesman who ever lived,
a master of strategy and deception. No one suspected what he was up to in
this case. Had he announced his real intentions, arguing that it was better
to wait now and fight later, he would not have won the argument, since
most Prussians wanted war at that moment and mistakenly believed that
their army was superior to the Austrians. Had he played up to the king,
asking to be made a minister in exchange for supporting peace, he would
not have succeeded either: The king would have distrusted his ambition
and doubted his sincerity.
By being completely insincere and sending misleading signals, however, he deceived everyone, concealed his purpose, and attained everything he wanted. Such is the power ofhiding your intentions.
KEYS TO POWER
Most people are open books. They say what they feel, blurt out their opinions at every opportunity, and constantly reveal their plans and intentions.
They do this for several reasons. First, it is easy and natural to always want
to talk about one’s feelings and plans for the future. It takes effort to control
your tongue and monitor what you reveal. Second, many believe that by
being honest and open they are winning people's hearts and showing their
good nature.They are greatly deluded. Honesty is actually a blunt instrument, which bloodies more than it cuts. Your honesty is likely to offend
people; it is much more prudent to tailor your words, telling people what
they want to hear rather than the coarse and ugly truth of what you feel or
think. More important, by being unabashedly open you make yourself so
predictable and familiar that it is almost impossible to respect or fear you,
and power will not accrue to a person who cannot inspire such emotions.
If you yearn for power, quickly lay honesty aside, and train yourself in
the art of concealing your intentions. Master the art and you will always
have the upper hand. Basic to an ability to conceal one’s intentions is a
simple tmth about human nature: Our first instinct is to always trust appearances. We cannot go around doubting the reality of what we see and
hear—-constantly imagining that appearances concealed something else
would exhaust and terrify us. This fact makes it relatively easy to conceal
one’s intentions. Simply dangle an object you seem to desire, a goal you
seem to aim for, in front ofpeople’s eyes and they will take the appearance
for reality. Once their eyes focus on the decoy, they will fail to notice what
you are really up to. In seduction, set up conflictinghsignals, such as desire
and indiiference, and you not only throw them off the scent, you inflame
their desire to possess you.
A tactic that is often effective in setting up a red herring is to appear to
support an idea or cause that is actually contrary to your own sentiments.
(Bismarck used this to great effect in his speech in 1850.) Most people will
believe you have experienced a change of heart, since it is so unusual to
play so lightly with something as emotional as one’s opinions and values.
The same applies for any decoyed object of desire: Seem to want something in which you are actually not at all interested and your enemies will
be thrown oil the scent. making all kinds of errors in their calculations.
During the War of the Spanish Succession in 1711, the Duke of Marlborough, head of the English army, wanted to destroy a key French fort,
because it protected a vital thoroughfare into France. Yet he knew that if be
destroyed it, the French would realize what he wanted-to advance down
that road. Instead, then, he merely captured the fort, and garrisoned it with
some of his troops, making it appear as if he wanted it for some purpose of
his own. The French attacked the fort and the duke let them recapture it.
Once they had it back, though, they destroyed it, figuring that the duke had
wanted it for some important reason. Now that the fort was gone, the road
was unprotected, and Marlborough could easily march into France,
Use this tactic in the following manner: Hide your intentions not by
closing up (with the risk of appearing secretive, and making people suspicious) but by talking endlessly about your desires and goals—~just not your
real ones. You will kill three birds with one stone: You appear friendly,
open, and trusting; you conceal your intentions; and you send your rivals
on timeconsuming wild~goose chases.
Another powerful tool in throwing people oh’ the scent is false sincerity. People easily mjstake sincerity for honesty. Remember-their first in
stinct is to trust appearances, and since they value honesty and want to
believe in the honesty of those around them, they will rarely doubt you or
see through your act. Seeming to believe what you say gives your words
great weight. This is how Iago deceived and destroyed Othello: Given the
depth of his emotions, the apparent sincerity of his concerns about Desde—
rnona’s supposed infidelity, how could Othello distrust him? This is also
how the great con artist Yellow Kid Weil pulled the wool over suckers’
eyes: Seeming to believe so deeply in the decayed object he was dangling
LAW 3 ,2]
22 f LAW 3
in front of them (a phony stock, a. touted racehorse), he made its reality
hard to doubt. It is important, of course, not to go too far in this area. Sin~
cexity is a
tricky tool: Appear overpassionate and you raise suspicions. Be
measured and believable or your ruse will seem the put-on that it is.
To make your false sincerity an effective weapon in concealing your
intentions, espouse a belief in honesty and fertlirightness as important social values. Do this as publicly as possible. Emphasize your position on this
subject by occasionally divulging some heartfelt thought-though only one
that is actually meaningless or irrelevant, of course. Napoleon"; minister
Talleyrand was a master at taking people into his confidence by revealing
some apparent secret. This feigned confidence——a decoy—-would then
elicit a real confidence on the other person’s part.
Remember: The best deceivers do everything they can to cloak their
{roguish qualities. They cultivate an air of honesty in one area to disguise
their dishonesty in others. Honesty is merely another decoy in their arsenal
of weapons.
1
r
I
5.-
PART II: USE SMOKE SCREENS TO
DISGUISE YOUR ACTIONS
Deception is always the best strategy, but the best deceptions require a screen
of smoke to distract peoples attention from your real purpose. The bland
exterior—like the unreadable pokerface——is often the perfect smoke screen,
hidingyour intentions behind the comfortable andfamiliar Ifyou lead the
sucker down a
familiarpath, he won ’t catch on when you lead him into a
trap.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW I
In 1910, a Mr. Sam Geezil of Chicago sold his warehouse business for close
to $1 million. He settled down to semiretirement and the managing of his
many properties, but deep inside he itched for the old days of deal-making.
One day a
young man namedJoseph Weil visited his office, wanting to buy
an apartment he had up for sale. Geezil explained the terms: The price was
$8,000, but he only required a down payment of $2,000. Weil said he
would sleep on it, but he came back the following day and offered to pay
the full $8,000 in cash, if Geezil could wait a
couple of days, until a deal
Weil was working on came through. Even in semiretirement, a clever businessman like Geezil was curious as to how Weil would be able to come up
with so much cash (roughly $150,000 today) so quickly. Wei] seemed reluctant to say, and quickly changed the subject, but Geezil was persistent. Finally, after assurances of confidentiality, Weil told Geezil the following
story.
Weil’s uncle was the secretary to a coterie of multimillionaire financiers. These wealthy gentlemen had purchased a hunting lodge in
Michigan ten years ago, at a cheap price. They had not used the lodge for a
few years, so they had decided to sell it and had asked Weil’s uncle to get
whatever he could for it. For reasons——-good reasons—of his own, the uncle
had been nursing a grudge against the millionaires for years; this was his
chance to get back at them. He would sell the property for $35,000 to a setup man (whom it was Weil’s job to find). The financiers were too wealthy to
worry about this low price. The set-up man would then turn around and
sell the property again for its real price, around $155,000. The uncle, Weil,
and the third man would split the profits from this second sale. It was all
legal and for a good cause—the uncle’s just retribution.
Geezil had heard enough: He wanted to be the set-up buyer. Weil was
reluctant to involve him, but Geezil would not back dovmz The idea of a
large profit, plus a little adventure, had him champing at the bit. Weil explained that Geezil would have to put up the $35,000 in cash to bring the
deal off. Geezil, a millionaire, said he could get the money with a
snap of
his fingers. Weil finally relented and agreed to arrange a meeting between
the uncle, Geezil, and the financiers, in the town of Galesburg, Illinois.
On the train ride to Galesburg, Geezil met the uncle—a.n impressive
.||'Jlll . KIM? HI‘ lHIt.v\|"|,.
Fl-'_l(l\.'* \l()RHll||’ (ll~
'|'l|I} ll)()l. liN\I.
Then Jehu assembled
all the people, and said
(0 them, “Ahab .\'erw¢a'
Ba ‘til a little: bm.lelzu
will serve him much
nwre. Now therefore
call to me all the
prophets 0fBa’al, all
his wars/rippers will all
his pri:?s1.\; let mme he
mis.ring,f0r1 have a
great mcrrifice to offer
/0 Ba’ul; whoever is
missing shall not live. "
Bu! Jehu did it with
rmming in unler to
destroy the worshippers of Ba 'al.
Am] Jehu orderell.
“Sanctify a solemn
as'seml>ly for Ba ’al. So
they procluinzerl it. And
Jehu sen! throughout
all Israel: and all the
worshippers 0fBzI "al
mine, so that there was
not a more left who (llll
not come. Ami they
entered the house of
Ba’al. and the lmusc of
Ba '41! was filled from
one end to the otlmr. . . .
Then Jehu went into
Ihe house ofBa'al. . .
and he Stlitl m the
worshippers of 8u’al,
“Search, and see
that there is no servant
uftlze LORD here
LAW :4 23
rmumg you, but only
flu’ ivurshipperx of
Ba’u[,” Then he went in
to offer sacrifices and
burnt offeringx.
Now Jeim had
stationed eight; man
outside, and said, “
The
man who allows any of
those whom [give into
your hands to escape
shall forfezt his life. "‘ So
as soon as he had made
an and ofoffcring the
burnt offering, Jehu
mill to Ihe guard and to
the officers, “Go in and
slay rhem;le1 not a man
escape.
”
So when they put them
In the .s'word, Ihe guard
and the officer: cast
them um and went into
the inner mom oflhe
house of 81111! and they
brought nm the pillar
that war in the house of
li’a'al and burned it
Ami they demolished
the pillar of Ba-’al arul
deniolixired the house
of Ba 11!, and made it (1
[amine to this day.
Thus Jclxu wiped mu
Ba ‘:11 from Israel.
OLD TESTAMENT.
2 KINGS 10:18-28
24 Law :1
man, with whom he avidly discussed business. Weil also brought along a
companion, a somewhat paundiy man named George Gross. Weil explained to Geezil that he himself was a boxing trainer, that Gross was one
of the promising piizefighters he trained, and that he had asked Gross to
come along to make sure the fighter stayed in shape. For a promising
fighter, Gross was unimpressive looking—he had gray hair and a beer
belly—but Geezil was so excited about the deal that he didn‘t really think
about the man’s flabby appearance.
Once in Galesburg, Weil and his uncle went to fetch the financiers
while Geezil waited in a hotel room with Gross, who promptly put on his
boxing trunks. As Geezil half watched, Gross began to shadowbox. Distracted as he was, Geezil ignored how badly the boxer wheezed after a few
minutes of exercise, although his style seemed real enough. An hour later,
Weil and his uncle reappeared with the financiers, an impressive, intimidat
ing gmup of men, all wearing fancy suits. The meeting went well and the financiers agreed to sell the lodge to Geezil, who had already had the
$35,000 wired to a local bank.
This minor business now settled, the financiers sat back in their chairs
and began to banter about high finance, throwing out the name ‘f]. P. Mor~
gain” as ifthey knew the man. Finally one of them noticed the boxer in the
corner of the room. Weil explained what he was doing there. The financier
countered that he too had a boxer in his entourage, whom he named. Weil
laughed brazenly and exclaimed that his man could easily knock out their
man. Conversation escalated into argument. In the heat of passion, Weil
challenged the men to a bet. The financiers eagerly agreed and left to get
their man ready for a
fight the next day.
As soon as they had left, the uncle yelled at Weil, right in front of
Geezil: They did not have enough money to bet with, and once the financiers discovered this, the uncle would be fired. Weil apologized for get»
ting him in this mess, but he had a plan: He knew the other boxer well, and
with a little bribe, they could fix the fight. But where would the money
come from for the bet? the uncle replied. Without it they were as good as
dead. Finally Geezil had heard enough. Unwilling to jeopardize his deal
with any ill will, he offered his own $35,000 cash for part of the bet. Even if
he lost that, he would wire for more money and still make a. profit on the
sale of the lodge. The uncle and nephew thanked him. With their own
$15,000 and Geezil’s $35,000 they would manage to have enough for the
bet. That evening, as Geezil watched the two boxers rehearse the fix in
the hotel room, his mind reeled at the killing he was going to make from both
the boxing match and the sale ofthe lodge.
The fight took place in a gym the next day. Well handled the cash,
which was placed for security in a locked box. Everything was pro»
ceeding as planned in the hotel room. The financiers were looking glum at
how badly their fighter was doing, and Geezil was dreaming about the easy
money he was about to make. Then, suddenly, a wild swing by the linai1cier’s fighter hit Gross hard in the face, knocking him down. When he
hit the canvas, blood spurted from his mouth. He coughed, then lay still.
One of the financiers, a former doctor, checked his pulse; he was dead. The
millionaires panicked: Everyone had to get out before the police arrived-—
they could all be charged with murder.
Terrified, Geezil hightailed it out of the gym and back to Chicago, leaving behind his $35,000 which he was only too glad to forget, for it seemed
a small price to pay to avoid being implicated in a crime. He never wanted
to see Weil or any of the others again.
After Geezil scurried out, Gross stood up, under his own steam. The
blood that had spurted from his mouth came from a ball filled with chicken
blood and hot water that he had hidden in his cheek. The whole affair had
been masterminded by Weil, better known as “the Yellow Kid,” one of the
most creative con artists in history. Weil split the $35,000 with the financiers and the boxers (all fellow con a:u'sts)—a nice little profit for a few
days’ work.
Interpretation
The Yellow Kid had staked out Geezil as the perfect sucker long before he
set up the con. He knew the boxingmatch scam would be the perfect ruse
to separate Geezil from his money quickly and definitively. But he also
knew that if he had begun by trying to interest Geezil in the boxing match,
he would have failed miserably. He had to conceal his intentions and
switch attention, create a smoke screen-—-in this case the sale of the lodge.
On the train ride and in the hotel room Geezil’s mind had been completely occupied with the pending deal, the easy money, the chance to
hobnob with wealthy men. He had failed to notice that Gross was out of
shape and middle-aged at best. Such is the distracting power of a smoke
screen. Engrossed in the business deal, Gee-zil’s attention was easily di—
verted to the boxing match, but only at a point when it was already too late
for him to notice the details that would have given Gross away. The match,
after all, now depended on a bribe rather than on the boxer’s physical condi~
lion. And Geezil was so distracted at the end by the illusion ofthe boxer’s death
that he completely forgot about his money.
Learn from the Yellow Kid: The familiar, inconspicuous front is the
perfect smoke screen. Approach your mark with an idea that seems ordi~
nary enough—a business deal, financial intrigue. The sucker’s mind is dis
tracted, his suspicions allayed. That is when you gently guide him onto the
second path, the slippery slope down which he slides helplessly into your
trap.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW II
In the mid-1920s, the powerful warlords ofEthiopia were coming to the realization that a
young man of the nobility named Haile Selassie, also
known as Ras Tafari, was outcompeting them all and nearing the point
where he could proclaim himself their leader, unifying the country for the
first time in decades. Most of his rivals could not understand how this
wispy,'quiet, mild—mannered man had been able to take control. Yet in
?:l:\llAI\' :\tIIi‘}SS THE
(N l‘Ll\.\ l\ BROAD
I)-’\\‘l.l(;llT
This means to create :1
from that eventually
becomes imbued with
flil fl[VflDSfl/IE7? 0!
irrtpresxian nffamilizzb
ily, within which the
strategist may mcmeuver unseen while all
eyes are trained to sea
obn'mrs faniiliarities.
“’l‘!ilE 'mmTv-six
sTR;n'r.Gn-5.“ QUOTET) rs
TH]: JAPANESE ARI‘ Ul“
WAR.
THOMAS Crmsv, 1991
26 LAW 3
1927, Selassie was able to summon the warlords, one at a time, to come to
Amldis Ababa to declare their loyalty and recognize him as leader.
Some hurried, some hesitated, but only one, Dejazmach Balcha of
Sidamo, dared defy Selassie totally. A blustery man, Balcha was a great
warrior, and he considered the new leader weak and unworthy. He pointedly stayed away from the capital. Finally Selassie, in his gentle but stern
way, commanded Balcha to come. The warlord decided to obey, but in
doing so he would turn the tables on this pretender to the Ethiopian
throne: He would come to Addis Ababa at his own speed, and with an
army of 10,000 men, a. force large enough to defend himself, perhaps even
start a civil war. Stationing this formidable force in a valley three miles
from the capital, he waited, as a king would. Selassie would have to come
to him.
Selassie did indeed send emissaries, asking Balcha to attend an after»
noon banquet in his honor. But Balcha, no fool, knew history—he knew
that previous kings and lords of Ethiopia had used banquets as a
trap.
Once he was there and full of drink, Selassie would have him arrested or
murdered. To signal his understanding of the situation, he agreed to come
to the banquet, but only if he could bring his personal b0dyguaId—-500 of
his best soldiers, all armed and ready to defend him and themselves. To
Balcha’s surprise, Selassie answered with the utmost politeness that he
would be honored to play host to such warriors.
On the way to the banquet, Balcha warned his soldiers not to get
drunk and to be on their guard. When they arrived at the palace, Selassie
was his charming best. He deferred to Balcha, treated him as if he desperately needed his approval and cooperation. But Balcha refused to be
charmed, and he warned Selassie that if he did not return to his camp by
nightfall, his army had orders to attack the capital. Selassie reacted as if
hurt by his mistrust. Over the meal, when it came time for the traditional
singing of songs in honor of Ethiopia’s leaders, he made a. point of allowing
only songs honoring the warlord of Sidarno. It seemed to Balcha that Se»
lassie was scared, intimidated by this great warrior who could not be outwittecl. Sensing the change, Balcha believed that he would be the one to
call the shots in the days to come.
At the end of the afternoon, Balcha and his soldiers began their march
back to camp amidst cheers and gun salutes. Looking back to the capital
over his shoulder, he planned his strategy—-how his own soldiers would
march through the capital in triumph within weeks, and Selassie would be
put in his place, his place being either prison or death. When Balcha came
in sight of his camp, however, he saw that something was terribly wrong.
Where before there had been colorful tents stretching as far as the eye
could see, now there was nothing, only smoke from doused fires. What
devil’s magic was this?
A witness told Balcha what had happened. During the banquet, a
large
army, commanded by an ally of Selassie’s, had stolen up on Balcha’s encampment by a side route he had not seen. This army had not come to
light, however: Knowing that Balcha would/have heard a noisy battle and
hurried back with his 600-man bodyguard, Selassie had .armed his own
troops with baskets of gold and cash. They had surrounded Balcha’s army
and proceeded to purchase every last one of their weapons. Those who re»
fused were easily intimidated. Within a few hours, Balcha’s entire force had
been disarmed and scattered in all directions.
Realizing his danger, Balcha decided to march south with his 600 soldiers to regroup, but the same army that had disarmed his soldiers blocked
his way. The other way out was to march on the capital, but Selassie had set
a
large army to defend it. Like a chess player, he had predicted Balcha’s
moves, and had checkmatecl him. For the first time in his life, Balcha surrendered. To repent his sins of pride and ambition, he agreed to enter a
monastery.
‘
Interpretation
Throughout Selassie’s long reign, no one could quite figure him out.
Ethiopians like their leaders fierce, but Selassie, who wore the front of a
gentle, peaceloving man, lasted longer than any of them. Never angry or
impatient, he lured his victims with sweet smiles, lulling them with charm
and obsequiousness before he attacked. In the case of Balcha, Selassie
played on the man’s wariness, his suspicion that the banquet was a
trap—
which in fact it was, but not the one he expected. Selassie’s way of allaying
Balcha’s fears—letting him bring his bodyguard to the banquet, giving him
top billing there, making him feel in contro1—-created a thick smoke screen,
concealing the real action three miles away.
Remember: The paranoid and wary are often the easiest to deceive.
Win their trust in one area and you have a smoke screen that blinds their
View in another, letting you creep up and level them with a devastating
blow. A helpful or apparently honest gesture, or one that implies the other
persorfs supen‘ority——these are perfect diversionary devices.
Properly set up, the smoke screen is a weapon of great power. It enabled the gentle Selassie to totally destroy his enemy, without firing a single
bullet.
Do not underestimate the power of Tafari. He creefis
like a mouse but he hasjaws like a lion.
fimlrim n/‘Sidmn.o’.s last ruarzls’ be/ima erztmzivcg the z:rnn.a.stary
KEYS TO POWER
If you believe that deceivers are colorful folk who mislead with elaborate
lies and tall tales, you are greatly mistaken. The best deceivers utilize a
bland and inconspicuous front that calls no attention to themselves. They
know that extravagant words and gestures immediately raise suspicion. Instead, they envelop their marlc in the familiar, the banal, the ha.rmless. In
Yellow Kid Weil’s dealings with Sam Geezil, the familiar was a business
deal. In the Ethiopian case, it was Selassie’s misleading obsequiousness—
exactly what'Balcha. would have expected from a weaker warlord.
LAW 3 27
LAW 3
Once you have lulled your suckers’ attention with the familiar, they
will not notice the deception being perpetrated behind their backs. This
derives from a simple truth: people can only focus on one thing at a time. It
is really too difficult for them to imagine that the bland and harmless per~
son they are dealing with is simultaneously setting up something else. The
grayer and more uniform the smoke in your smoke screen, the better it
conceals your intentions. In the decoy and red herring devices discussed in
Part I, you actively distract people; in the smoke screen, you lull your victims, drawing them into your web. Because it is so hypnotic, this is often
the best way of concealing your intentions.
The simplest form of smoke screen is facial expression. Behind a bland,
unreadable exterior, all sorts ofmayhem can be planned, without detection.
This is a weapon that the most powerful men in history have learned to perfect. It was said that no one could read Franklin D. Roosevelfs face. Baron
james Rothschild made a
lifelong practice ofdisguising his real thoughts be
hind bland smiles and nondescript looks. Stendhal wrote of Talleyrand,
“Never was a face less of a barometer.” Henry Kissinger would bore his op—
ponents around the negotiating table to tears with his monotonous voice,
his blank look, his endless recitations of details; then, as their eyes glazed
over, he would suddenly hit them with a list of bold terms. Caught off»
guard, they would be easily intimidated. As one poker manual explains it,
“While playing his hand, the good player is seldom an actor. Instead he
practices a bland behavior that minimizes readable patterns, frustrates and
confuses opponents, permits greater concentration,”
An adaptable concept, the smoke screen can be practiced on a number of levels, all playing on the psychological principles of distraction and
misdirection. One of the most effective smoke screens is the noble gesture.
People want to believe apparently noble gestures are genuine, for the belief
is pleasant. They rarely notice how deceptive these gestures can be.
The art dealerjoseph Duveen was once confronted with a terrible problem. The millionaires who had paid so dearly for Duveen’s paintings were
running out of wall space, and with inheritance taxes getting ever higher, it
seemed unlikely that they would keep buying. The solution was the National
Gallery ofArt in Washington, D.C., which Duveen helped create in 1937 by
getting Andrew Mellon to donate his collection to it. The National Gallery
was the perfect front for Duveen. In one gesture, his clients avoided taxes,
cleared wall space for new purchases, and reduced the number of paintings
on the market, maintaining the upward pressure on their prices. All this
while the donors created the appearance ofbeing public benefactors.
Another effective smoke screen is the pattern, the establishment of a se
ries of actions that seduce the victim into believing you will continue in the
same way. The pattern plays on the psychology of anticipation: Our behav~
ior conforms to patterns, or so we like to think.
In 1878 the American robber baronjay Gould created a
company that
began to threaten the monopoly of the telegraph company Western Union.
The directors of Western Union decided to buy Gould’s company up-
they had to spend a hefty sum, but they figured they had managed to rid
themselves of an irritating competitor. A few months later, though, Gould
was it at again, complaining he had been treated unfairly. He started up a
second company to compete with Western Union and its new acquisition.
The same thing happened again: Western Union bought him out to shut
him up. Soon the pattern began for the third time, but now Gould went for
the jugular: He suddenly staged a bloody takeover struggle and managed
to gain complete control of Western Union. He had established a pattern
that had tricked the company’s directors into thinking his goal was to be
bought out at a handsome rate. Once they paid him off, they relaxed and
failed to notice that he was actually playing for higher stakes. The pattern is
powerful in that it deceives the other person into expecting the opposite of
what you are really doing.
Anotlier psychological weakness on which to construct a smoke screen
is the tendency to mistake appearances for reality-——the feeling that if someone seems to belong to your group, their belonging must be real. This habit
makes the seamless blend a
very effective front. The trick is simple: You sim«
ply blend in with those around you. The better you blend, the less suspicious you become. During the Cold War of the 1950s and ’60s, as is now
notorious, a slew ofBritish civil servants passed secrets to the Soviets. They
went undetected for years because they were apparently decent chaps, had
gone to all the right schools, and lit the oldvboy network perfectly. Blend~
ing in is the perfect smoke screen for spying. The better you do it, the better you can conceal your intentions.
Remember: It takes patience and humility to dull your brilliant colors,
to put on the mask of the inconspicuous. Do not despair at having to wear
such a bland rnask~—it is often your unreadability that draws people to you
and makes you appear a
person of power.
Image: A Sheep’s Skin.
A sheep never marauds,
a sheep never deceives,
a sheep is magnificently
dumb and docile. With a
sheepskin on his back,
a fox can pass right
into the chicken coop.
Authority: Have you ever heard of a skillful general, who intends to
surprise a citadel, announcing his plan to his enemy? Conceal your
purpose and hide your progress; do not disclose the extent of your
designs until they cannot be opposed. until the combat is over. Win
the victory before you declare the war. In a word, imitate those walk
like people whose designs are not known except by the ravaged coun—
try through which they have passed. (Ninon cle Lenclos, 16234706)
LAW 3 $29
30 LAW 3
REVERSAL
No smoke screen, red herring, false sincerity, or any other diversionary device will succeed in concealing your intentions if you already have an established reputation for deception. And as you get older and achieve
success, it often becomes increasingly difficult to disguise your cunning.
Everyone knows you practice deception; persist in playing naive and you
run the risk of seeming the rankest hypocrite, which will severely limit
your room to maneuver. In such cases it is better to own up, to appear the
honest rogue, or, better, the repentant rogue. Not only will you be admired
for your frankness, but, most wonderful and strange of all, you will be able
to continue your stratagems.
As P. T. Barnum, the nineteenth-century king of humbuggery, grew
older, he learned to embrace his reputation as a grand deceiver. At one
point he organized a buffalo hunt in New jersey, complete with Indians
and a few imported buffalo. He publicized the hunt as genuine, but it came
off as so completely fake that the crowd, instead of getting angry and asking for their money back, was greatly amused. They knew Barnum pulled
t:ricks all the time; that was the secret of his success, and they loved him for
it. Learning a lesson from this affair, Barnum stopped concealing all of his
devices, even revealing his deceptions in a tell—all autobiography. As
Kierkegaard wrote, “The world wants to be deceived.”
Finally, although it is wiser to divert attention from your purposes by
presenting a bland, familiar exterior, there are times when the colorful,
conspicuous gesture is the right diversionary tactic. The great charlatan
mountebanks of seventeenth- and eighteenth-century Europe used humor
and entertainment to deceive their audiences. Dazzled by a
great show, the
public would not notice the charlatans’ real intentions. Thus the star charlatan himself would appear in town in a night-black coach drawn by black
horses. Clowns, tightrope walkers, and star entertainers would accompany
him, pulling people in to his demonstrations of elixirs and quack potions.
The charlatan made entertainment seem like the business of the day; the
business of the day was actually the sale of the elixirs and quack potions.
Spectacle and entertainment, clearly, are excellent devices to conceal
your intentions, but they cannot be used indefinitely. The public grows
tired and suspicious, and eventually catches on to the trick. And indeed the
charlatans had to move quickly from town to town, before word spread
that the potions were useless and the entertainment a trick. Powerful people with bland exteriors, on the other hand—the Talleyrands, the Rothschilds, the Selassies—can practice their deceptions in the same place
throughout their lifetimes. Their act never wears thin, and rarely causes
suspicion. The colorful smoke screen should be used cautiously, then, and
only when the occasion is right.
LAW
ALWAYS SAY LESS
THAN NECESSARY
_j UDGMENT
When you are trying to impress people with words, the
more you say, the move common you appear and the less
in control. Even you are saying something banal, it will
seem miginal you make it vague, open—ended, and
sphinxlike. Powerful people impress and intimidate by \
saying less. The more you say, the more likely you me to
say somethingfoolish.
Down, on his luck, [the
S(3l‘e(?flWflf(<‘Y] Mirrhuel
Arlm wmt to /Vow
York in 1944. T2) drown
l1is.s'¢2rrow.s‘ he paid 11
VlSlI to the famous
restaurant “2I." In the
lobby, he ran into Sam
Goldwyn, who offered
Ihc somewhat impractical advice that he
should buy mcelzorsex
A! the box./irien met
Louis 8. Mayer. an old
acquaintance, who
asked him what were
his plans for the future.
‘‘I was just talking to
Sam Goldwyn . .
began Arlen. "How
much did he offer
you?
"
ziiterruptcd
Mayer. “Not enough,"
he replied evusively.
“Would you take fifteen
ihousami for thirty
wt-ek5?”uskcd Mayer.
No hesitation this time.
“Yes "
said Arlen.
rm: urns, snows
300K or ANF.(‘D(}TES.
CLIFTON FADIMAN.
Fan, 1985
Om’ oft-will tale about
Kissinger . . .
involved a report that
l'Vimrtrm Lord had
worked‘ on for days.
Afiter giving it to
Kissinger, he got it
baclc with the notation,
“Is this the best you
can Ila?” Lord rowrote
and polLx'l2ez1 and
finally I’(<‘SMlNYliI!(¢(.l it,‘
back 11 came with the
same curl question.
After rellmfting it one
more n'me—and once
again getting the same
32 LAW 4
TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW
Gnaeus Marcius, also known as Coriolanus, was a great military hero of
ancient Rome. In the first half of the fifth century B.C. he won many important battles, saving the city from calamity time and time again. Because he
spent most of his time on the battlefield, few Romans knew him personally,
making him something of a
legendary figure.
In 454 B.C., Coriolanus decided it was time to exploit his reputation
and enter politics. He stood for election to the high rank of consul. Candi—
dates for this position traditionally made a public address early in the race,
and when Coriolanus came before the people, he began by displaying the
dozens of scars he had accumulated over seventeen years of fighting for
Rome. Few in the crowd really heard the lengthy speech that followed;
those scars, proof of his valor and patriotism, moved the people to tears.
Coriola.nus’s election seemed certain.
When the polling day arrived, however, Coriolanus made an entry
into the forum escorted by the entire senate and by the city’s patricians, the
aristocracy. The common people who saw this were disturbed by such a
blustering show of confidence on election day.
And then Coriolanus spoke again, mostly addressing the wealthy citizens who had accompanied him. His words were arrogant and insolent.
Claiming certain victory in the vote, he boasted of his battlefield exploits,
made sour jokes that appealed only to the patricians, voiced angry accuser»
tions against his opponents, and speculated on the riches he would bring to
Rome. This time the people listened: They had not realized that this legendary soldier was also a common braggart.
News of Coriolanus’s second speech spread quickly through Rome,
and the people turned out in great numbers to make sure he was not
elected. Defeated, Coriolanus returned to the battlefield, bitter and vowing
revenge on the common folk who had voted against him. Some weeks later
a
large shipment of grain arrived in Rome. The senate was ready to distrib~
ute this food to the people, for free, but just as they were preparing to vote
on the question Coriolanus appeared on the scene and took the senate
floor. The distribution, he argued, would have a. harmful effect on the city
as a whole. Several senators appeared won over, and the vote on the distribution fell into doubt. Coiiolanus did not stop there: He went on to con—
demo the concept of democracy itself. He advocated getting rid of the
people’s represen!atives—the tribunes-—-and turning over the governing of
the city to the patricians.
When word of Coriolanus’s latest speech reached the people, their
anger knew no bounds. The tribunes were sent to the senate to demand
that Coriolanus appear before them. He refused. Riots broke out all over
the city. The senate, fearing the people’s wrath, finally voted in favor of the
grain distribution. The tribunes were appeased, but the people still do
manded that Coriolanus speak to them and apologize. If he repented, and
agreed to keep his opinions to himself, he would be allowed to return to
the battlefield.
Coriolanus did appear one last time before the people, who listened to
him in rapt silence. He started slowly and softly, but as the speech went on,
he became more and more blunt. Yet again he hurled insults! His tone was
arrogant, his expression disdainful. The more he spoke, the angtier the
people became. Finally they shouted him down and silenced him.
The tribunes conferred, condemned Coriolanus to death, and ordered
the magistrates to take him at once to the top of the Titrpeian rock and
throw him over. The delighted crowd seconded the decision. The patricians, however, managed to intervene, and the sentence was commuted to
a
lifelong banishment. When the people found out that Rome’s great military hero would never retum to the city, they celebrated in the streets. In
fact no one had ever seen web a celebration, not even after the defeat of a
foreign enemy.
Interpretation
Before his entrance into politics, the name of Coriolanus evoked awe.
His battlefield accomplishments showed him as a man of great bravery. Since the citizens knew little about him, all kinds of legends became attached to his name. The moment he appeared before the Roman citizens,
however, and spoke his mind, all that grandeur and mystery vanished. He
bragged and blustered like a common soldier. He insulted and slandered
people, as if he felt threatened and insecure. Suddenly he was not at all
what the people had imagined. The discrepancy between the legend and
the reality proved immensely disappointing to those who wanted to be
lieve in their hero. The more Coriolanus said, the less powerful he appeared——-a person who cannot control his words shows that he cannot
control himself, and is unworthy ofrespect.
Had Coriolanus said less, the people would never have had cause to
be offended by him, would never have known his true feelings. He would
have maintained his powerful aura, would certainly have been elected con’
sul, and would have been able to accomplish his antidemocratic goals. But
the human tongue is a beast that few can master. It strains constantly to
break out of its cage, and if it is not tamed, it will run wild and cause you
grief. Power cannot accrue to those who squander their treasure of words.
(lysters open completely when the moon is full; and when the crab sees one
it throws a
piece of stone or seaweed into it and the IIy.§’lR‘V cannot close
again so that it serves the crab for mmt. Such is the’fate ofhim who opens
his mouth too much and thereby puts himself at the mercy of the listener.
I,Hmtz.2“(.ir9 {Ia Vina, 1452-£519
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
In the court of Louis XIV, nobles and ministers would spend days and
nights debating issues of state. They would confer, argue, make and break
alliances, and argue again, until finally the critical moment arrived: Two of
them would be chosen to represent the different sides to Louis himself,
who would decide what should be done. After these persons were chosen,
question from
Kissinger —— [nrd
snapped. “Damn ii. yes
its rim bar I can do. "
To which Ki.\‘SlIlg¢','f
replied: “Fina than I
guess I'll read it this
nrmr.
"
KISSINGER,
\\«’m:rF,R ls,-1/tC$0N,
1992
The King ,‘1.nm'5 XIV]
maintains the mar!
impenetrable xecrrery
about affairs of Salli’.
The rninirlcrs utleml
cmmcil nieclmgs, but
he confides his plans to
.'hem only when he has
reflertiz/ti at length uprm
them and has come to
a zlefinizc dcnsimi,
I with you might see
the King. Hir BXpN.’.)'“
.\‘ion is inscmIaI.wle>; I1i.\'
e_ve5' like lhosc of a fm-.
He never dz'scus.s‘e.$
Slate affairs except with
hI'.s- rliinisfers in (‘mmcil. W/mu he speaks to
courtiers he refers only
to their respective
przerogazives or dz¢Ii.2y.
Even the most friw.»
lous ofhir utI€n‘1rl(‘€.s‘
has the air ofheirzg the
manozmcemenl of an
anurle.
YRIM‘. VlS(‘,()NTl.
<>I.'m1=,n IN
Louis xiv.
Lot. is r«:Ri'i{A:~£r).
1928
LAW 4 3:3’
Umiuziful words ofa
sI4b}er.'I (In often mks
deeper I'()()l than the
memory zwflll ileedv . . .
The late Earl of Emex
mlal Qzmerx E/izulmh
that her co/zdilizms
were as cznmkrd as her
xx: but il ms: Izim
his hmd, WhiL'h his‘
im'urrec(z’mz had 711)!
ms! htfil but for that
.\‘p(‘d(,'ll.
car
SIR WAl'I‘liR RA|,FI{jH.
1554--1618
34 LAW 4
everyone would argue some more: How should the issues he phrased?
What would appeal to Louis, what would annoy him? At what fime ofday
should the representatives approach him, and in what part of the Versailles
palace? What expression should they have on their faces?
Finally, after all this was settled, the fateful moment would finally at»
rive. The two men would approach Louis—always a delicate matterwand
when they finally had his ear, they would talk about the issue at hand,
spelling out the options in detail.
Louis would listen in silence, a most enigmatic look on his face. Finally, when each had finished his presentation and had asked for the king’s
opinion, he would look at them both and say, “I shall see.” Then he would
walk away‘
The ministers and courtiers would never hear another word on this
subject from the king——they would simply see the result, weeks later, when
he would come to a decision and act. He would never bother to consult
them on the matter again.
lnterpretation
Louis XIV was a man of very few words. His most famous remark is
"
‘fiat, c’est moi” (“I am the state”); nothing could be more pithy yet more
eloquent. His infamous “I shall see” was one of several extremely short
phrases that he would apply to all manner ofrequests.
Louis was not always this way; as a
young man he was known for talking at length, delighting in his own eloquence. His later taciturnity was selfimposed, an act, a mask he used to keep everybody below him off-balance.
No one knew exactly where he stood, or could predict his reactions. No
one could try to deceive him by saying what they thought he wanted to
hear, because no one knew what he wanted to hear. As they talked on and
on to the silent Louis, they revealed more and more about themselves, information he would later use against them to great effect.
In the end, Louis’s silence kept those around him terrified and under
his thumb. It was one of the foundations of his power. As Saint—Simon
wrote, “No one knew as well as he how to sell his words, his smile, even his
glances. Everything in him was valuable because he created differences,
and his majesty was enhanced by the sparseness of his words.”
It is evm more damagingfor a minister to sayfoalish things than to do them.
(Ianlimzl de Rm, 1613 1679
KEYS T0 POWER
Power is in many ways a
game of appearances, and when you say less than
necessary, you inevitably appear greater and more powerful than you are.
Your silence will make other people uncomfortable. Humans are machines
of interpretation and explanation; they have to know what you are think»
ing. When you carefully control what you reveal, they cannot pierce your
intentions or your meaning.
Your short answers and silences will put them on the defensive, and
they will jump in, nervously filling the silence with all kinds of comments
that will reveal valuable information about them and their weaknesses.
They will leave a meeting with you feeling as if they had been robbed, and
they will go home and ponder your every word. This extra attention to
your brief comments will only add to your power.
Saying less than necessary is not for kings and statesmen only. In most
areas of life, the less you say, the more profound and mysterious you appear. As a
young man, the artistAndy Warhol had the revelation that it was
generally impossible to get people to do what you wanted them to do by
talking to them. They would turn against you, subvert your wishes, disobey
you out of sheer perversity. He once told a friend, “I learned that you actu~
ally have more power when you shut up.”
in his later life Warhol employed this strategy with great success. His
interviews were exercises in oracular speech: He would say something
vague and ambiguous, and the interviewer would twist in circles trying to
figure it out, imagining there was something profound behind his often
meaningless phrases. Warhol rarely talked about his work; he let others do
the interpreting. He claimed to have learned this technique from that master of enigma Marcel Duchamp, another twentieth-century artist who realized early on that the less he said about his work, the more people talked
about it. And the more they talked, the more valuable his work became.
By saying less than necessary you create the appearance of meaning
and power. Also, the less you say, the less risk you run of saying something
foolish, even dangerous. In 1825 a new czar, Nicholas 1, ascended the
throne of Russia. A rebellion immediately broke out, led by liberals demanding that the country modemize~—-that its industries and civil structures catch up with the rest ofEurope. Brutally crushing this rebellion (the
Decembrist Uprising), Nicholas I sentenced one of its leaders, Kondraty
Ryleyev, to death. On the day of the execution Ryleyev stood on the
lows, the noose around his neck. The trapdoor opened~——~but as Ryleyev
dangled, the rope broke, dashing him to the ground. At the time, events
like this were considered signs of providence or heavenly will, and a man
saved from execution this way was usually pardoned. As Ryleyev got to his
feet, bruised and dirtied but believing his neck had been saved, he called
out to the crowd, “You see, in Russia they don’t know how to do anything
properly, not even how to make rope!”
A messenger immediately went to the Winter Palace with news of the
failed hanging. Vexed by this disappointing turnabout, Nicholas 1 nevertheless began to sign the pardon. But then: “Did Ryleyev say anything after
this miracle?” the czar asked the messenger. “Sire,” the messenger replied,
“he said that in Russia they don’t even know how to make rope.”
“In that case,” said the Czar, “let us prove the contrary,” and he tore
up the pardon. The next day Ryleyev was hanged again. This time the
rope did not break.
Learn the lesson: Once the words are out, you cannot take them back.
Keep them under control. Be particularly careful with sarcasm: The moLAW 4 .75
36 LAW 4
mentary satisfaction you gain with your biting words will be outweighed by
the price you pay.
I m at g
e 1
The Oracle at Delphi.
When visitors consulted the
Oracle, the priestess would utter
a few enigmatic words that seemed
full of meaning and import. No one
disobeyed the words of the Oraclethey held power over life and death.
Authority: Never start moving your own lips and teeth before
the subordinates do. The longer I keep quiet, the sooner others
move their lips and teeth. As they move their lips and teeth, I
can thereby understand their real intentions. . . . Ifthe sovereign
is not mysterious, the ministers will find opportunity to take
and take. (Han-feivtzu, Chinese philosopher, third century B.C.)
REVERSAL
There are times when it is unwise to be silent. Silence can arouse suspicion
and even insecurity, especially in your superiors; a
vague or ambiguous
comment can open you up to interpretations you had not bargained for. Silence and saying less than necessary must be practiced with caution, then,
and in the right situations. It is occasionally wiser to imitate the courtjester,
who plays the fool but knows he is smarter than the king. He talks and talks
and entertains, and no one suspects that he is more than just a fool.
Also. words can sometimes act as a kind of smoke screen for any deception you might practice. By bending your listener’s ear with talk, you
can distract and mesmerize them; the more you talk, in fact, the less suspicious of you they become. The verbose are not perceived as sly and manipulative but as helpless and unsophisticated. This is the reverse of the
silent policy employed by the powerful: By talking more, and making
yourself appear weaker and less intelligent than your mark, you can practice deception with greater ease.
LAW
SO MUCH DEPENDS ON
REPUTATION—GUARD IT
WITH YOUR LIFE
JUDGMENT
Reputation is the camerstane afpowet: Tlmmgh reputw
tion alone you can intimidate and win; once it slips,
however, you (me vulnerable, and will be attacked on all
sides. Make your refiutatéon unassailable. Always be
alert to poiential attacks and thwart them before they
happen. Meanwhiie, leam to dastmy your enemies by
opming lwles in their own rejmtaéiorzs. Then stand
aside and let public opinion hang them.
37
‘I Ill’. .\\|\| U .‘\
at |iH.K!:\ \\ (Tl! TH!
l'l HA 1'
A frig/1/ful ¢-/iidmm,
SKIN
To mrvh by llwwn
[merit In rm!
Its /‘ury an 41 smful
worfd. In calf
It by its rightful name.
the [7(,’.8‘fi[(’Il(‘I{,
That Arhermzfillirzg
2.-512! of vim:’cIz<:¢'
Had Iallvn on every
animal.
Not all were (Ir.-art. but
all lay near (0 dying»,
And nuns‘ was any
I(7ngcr Irymg
To find new fuel mflem‘
life '5 _flI'('kwzng fires:
Nu fimds mciled their
(im'zW.\','
No more [lid wnlvm
and f(Jxé’.\‘ row
In .wurrtI1 uflmrni/e.x.i,
/w/piers: pray,‘
/X mi dove wtmi(I' not
mnmr: will: tinvr.
For low and joy lzuzl
/lawn rm-av.
Tlzr Lion axxtzriverl flu»-
Lthnir tn my.‘ “Dear
_frtcm1.\‘.
I doubt not lfvfor
heaven's Iiigh (‘mfg
Thur on us .xinrwr.i' wm»
mmtfull.
Let him ofm who‘;
.3iII!1('ll the mar!
Full virrint II) the
£Il‘E’HgiIIg /l('Ll V011,)’
hoxz,
Ami mr1_v hr min .mIm—
firm for 11,) all;
For hiSI()ry truth '
that in riww 1
We must Inukr
.s‘m‘r1:/i(1’.\‘.
Ul1(1(ft‘€lW€(1 and .st<'rnA
eyrri. 1:13‘ in.«'{2€cI
Our L(H'I.s(.‘l£,‘!1(‘(’. Ax I
re: ollccr.
To put my ;:r:'rrI_v
appetite In .s'1r><-p,
I've hanqzwluzl my
\‘
38 ,
LAW5
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAWI
During China’s War of the Three Kingdoms (A.D. 207—265), the great general Chuko Liang, leading the forces of the Sim Kingdom, dispatched his
vast army to a distant camp while he rested in a small town with a handful
of soldiers. Suddenly sentinels hurried in with the alarming news that an
enemy force of over 150,000 troops under Sima Yi was approaching. With
only a hundred men to defend him, Chuko Liang’s situation was hopeless.
The enemy would finally capture this renowned leader.
Without lamenting his fate, or wasting time trying to figure out how he
had been caught, Liang ordered his troops to take down their flags, throw
open the city gates, and hide. He himself then took a seat on the most visible part of the city’s wall, wearing a Taoist robe. He lit some incense,
strummed his lute, and began to chant. Minutes later he could see the vast
enemy army approaching, an endless phalanx of soldiers. Pretending not
to notice them, he continued to sing and play the lute.
Soon the army stood at the town gates, At its head was Sima Yi, who
instantly recognized the man on the wall.
Even so, as his soldiers itched to enter the unguarded town through its
open gates, Sima Yi hesitated, held them back, and studied Liang on the
wall. Then, he ordered an immediate and speedy retreat.
Interpretation
Chuko Liang was commonly known as the “Sleeping Dragon.” His exploits in the War of the Three Kingdoms were legendary. Once a man
claiming to be a disaffected enemy lieutenant came to his camp, offering
help and information. Liang instantly recognized the situation as a
setup;
this man was a false deserter, and should be beheaded. At the last minute,
though, as the ax was about to fall, Liang stopped the execution and offered to spare the man’s life if he agreed to become a double agent. Grate
ful and terrified, the man agreed, and began supplying false information to
the enemy. Liang won battle after battle.
On another occasion Liang stole a military seal and created false documents dispatching his enemy’s troops to distant locations. Once the troops
had dispersed, he was able to capture three cities, so that he controlled an
entire corridor of the enemy’s kingdom. He also once tricked the enemy
into believing one of its best generals was a traitor, forcing the man to escape and join forces with Liang. The Sleeping Dragon carefully cultivated
his reputation of being the cleverest man in China, one who always had a
trick up his sleeve. As powerful as any weapon, this reputation struck fear
into his enemy.
Sima Yi had fought against Chuko Liang dozens of times and knew
him well. When he came on the empty city, with Liang praying on the
wall, he was stunned. The Taoist robes, the chanting, the incense——this had
to be a
game of intimidation. The man was obviously taunting him, daring
him to walk into a
trap. The game was so obvious that for one moment it
crossed Yi’s mind that Liang actually was alone, and desperate. But so
great was his fear of Liang that he dared not risk finding out. Such is the
power of reputation. It can put a vast army on the defensive, even force
them into retreat, without a
single arrow being fired.
F07; as Cicero says, even those who argue againstfame still want the books they
write against it to bear their name in the title and hope to becamefamousfor
despising it. Everything else is subject to barter: we will let ourfriends have
ourgoods and our lives if need be; but a case ofsharing auvfame and
making someone else the gift ofour reputation is hardly to befound.
ll/Ior1Io7'g74.e, 1533-1 592
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW II
In 1841 the young P. T. Barnum, trying to establish his reputation as America's premier showman, decided to purchase the American Museum in
Manhattan and turn it into a collection of curiosities that would secure his
fame. The problem was that he had no money. The museum’s asking price
was $15,000, but Barnum was able to put together a proposal that appealed
to the institution’s owners even though it replaced cash up front with
dozens of guarantees and references. The owners came to a verbal agree
ment with Barnum, but at the last minute, the principal partner changed
his mind, and the museum and its collection were sold to the directors of
Peale’s Museum. Barnum was infuriated, but the partner explained that
business was business——the museum had been sold to Pea1e’s because
Peale’s had a
reputation and Barnum had none.
Barnum immediately decided that if he had no reputation to bank on,
his only recourse was to min the reputation of Peale’s. Accordingly he
launched a
letter-writing campaign in the newspapers, calling the owners a
bunch of“broken-down bank directors” who had no idea how to run a museum or entertain people. He warned the public against buying Peale’s
stock, since the business’s purchase of another museum would invariably
spread its resources thin. The campaign was effective, the stock plummeted, and with no more confidence in Pea.le’s track record and reputation, the owners of the American Museum reneged on their deal and sold
the whole thing to Barnum.
It took years for Pea.le’s to recover, and they never forgot what Barnum had done. Mr. Peale himself decided to attack Barnum by building a
reputation for “highbrow entertainment,” promoting his museum’s pro
grams as more scientific than those of his vulgar competitor. Mesmerism
(hypnotism) was one of Pea.le’s “scientific” attractions, and for a while it
drew big crowds and was quite successful. To fight back, Barnum decided
to attack Peale’s reputation yet again.
Barnum organized a rival mesmeric performance in which he himself
apparently put a little girl into a trance. Once she seemed to have fallen
deeply under, he tried to hypnotize members of the audience~—but no matter how hard he tried, none of the spectators fell under his spell, and many
of them began to laugh. A frustrated Barnum finally announced that to
prove the little girl’s trance was real, he would cut off one of her fingers
many a sheep
Who’d in/ured me in
no rH.\’])4’Cl.
And even in my time
been known to rry
Shepherd pie.
I/‘need he, then. I’ll die.
Yet I SIISPECI
That others also cough!
(0 own their film‘.
1119 only fair tho! all
should do their best
To single out the
guilllesl. "
“Sire, you're too good
a king, "
the For hcgmv;
"Sucli scruples’ are too
delicate. lily word,
lb cm shc'cp, thu!
profane mu] vulgar
herd,
Thafs sin? Nay. Sim
enough /or Slltll ti crew
To be dr-vourerl by
xuclz as you;
While oflhc .\‘l7€[lllL‘t‘(lS
we may my
Thur they ¢l(’.l'€IvE'il the
worst they got,
'l‘heir.v bcmg rlze lo!
llwl over us‘ [1eu5!.\' plot
A /Iinzsy dreamll(’g()ll¢’,Il sway.
"
Thiix spake (he Fox,
and tomly L'hccr.s' rate
high,
While none dam! cm‘!
too cold an cyr:
(M 'l'lgerI\, Bcur'.s: Illltl
other eminmccs‘
(1/lax‘! Impanlamzlalra
of‘/’PI1ce.s‘.
Each, ofnevcr mind
what currish lmrd.
Was really 11 saint, lhey
all agrecrl.
Tlzm mm." My Ass, In
my: "1 do recall
[low once I crmxwzrl on
obln’y-mt-ad
Whore hunger, grim‘ in
plenty. and wtrhul,
I /lave no zlmiln. xome
imp ofg/‘ecrl,
/l.\'.\'alli*rl me. and I
slmverl a
/ungue '3‘-
hrezzdzh wide
Whive frurzkly Ill no
right to Amy grass.
"
LAW 5 39
All forthwith fell full
cry upon the Ass:
A Wolfofsome booklearning teslified
Tim! that curs: beast
mus! suffer Iheir
despite,
That gullskimzerl
author oftheir [71'te0L¢s
plight.
They judged him fir
for naught but
gallows-bail.’
How vile, anal/zeris
grass to xec1uestrzIlr’.’
His death alone could
wcpiale
A crime so heinous, as
full well he learns.
Tim (curt, as youtz» of
grcal orpoor estate,
Willpamt you either
white or bfllilk by turns‘.
III}?-. masr i=AnLi:s
or LA FON'IAl\'lZ,
J1-:AN m= LA l7()NT.A\lNF,
1621-1695
4!) LAW 5
without her noticing. But as he sharpened the knife, the little girl’s eyes
popped open and she ran away, to the audience’s delight. He repeated this
and other parodies for several weeks. Soon no one could take Peale’s show
seriously, and attendance went way down. Within a few weeks, the show
closed. Over the next few years Bamum established a
reputation for audacity and consummate showtnanship that lasted his whole life. Pea1e’s reputation, on the other hand, never recovered.
Interpretation
Bamum used two different tactics to ruin Peale’s reputation. The first was
simple: He sowed doubts about the museum’s stability and solvency.
Doubt is a powerful weapon: Once you let it out of the bag with insidious
rumors, your opponents are in a horrible dilemma. On the one hand they
can deny the rumors, even prove that you have slandered them. But a
layer of suspicion will remain: Why are they defending themselves so desperately? Maybe the rumor has some truth to it? If, on the other hand, they
take the high road and ignore you, the doubts, unrefuted, will be even
stronger. If done correctly, the sowing of rumors can so infuriate and unsettle your rivals that in defending themselves they will make numerous mistakes. This is the perfect weapon for those who have no reputation of their
own to work from.
Once Bamum did have a
reputation of his own, he used the second,
gentler tactic, the fake hypnotism demonstration: He ridiculed his rivals’
reputation. This too was extremely successful. Once you have a solid base
of respect, ridiculing your opponent both puts him on the defensive and
draws more attention to you, enhancing your own reputation. Outright
slander and insult are too strong at this point; they are ugly, and may hurt
you more than help you. But gentle barbs and mockery suggest that you
have a
strong enough sense of your own worth to enjoy a good laugh at
your rival’s expense. A humorous front can make you out as a harmless entertainer while poking holes in the reputation of your rival.
It is easier to cope with a bad conscience than with a bad reputation.
Friedrirh /Vietzsrhrc, 18-44—I 900
KEYS TO POWER
The people around us, even our closest friends, will always to some extent
remain mysterious and unfathomable. Their characters have secret recesses
that they never reveal. The unknowableness of other people could prove
disturbing if we thought about it long enough, since it would make it impossible for us really to judge other people. So we prefer to ignore this fact,
and to judge people on their appearances, on what is most visible to our
eyes—-clothes, gestures, words, actions. In the social realm, appearances are
the barometer of almost all of our judgments, and you must never be nusled into believing otherwise. One false slip, one awkward or sudden change
in your appearance, can prove disastrous.
This is the reason for the supreme importance of making and maintaining a
reputation that is of your own creation.
That reputation will protect you in the dangerous game of appearances, distracting the probing eyes of others from knowing what you are
really like, and giving you a degree of control over how the world judges
you—a powerful position to be in. Reputation has a
power like magic:
With one stroke of its wand, it can double your strength. It can also send
people scurrying away from you. Whether the exact same deeds appear
brilliant or dreadful can depend entirely on the reputation of the deer.
In the ancient Chinese court of the Wei kingdom there was a man
named Mi Tzu-hsia who had a
reputation for supreme civility and graciousness. He became the mler’s favorite. It was a law in Wei that “whoever
rides secretly in the ruler’s coach shall have his feet cut off,” but when Mi
Tzu-hsia’s mother fell ill, he used the royal coach to visit her, pretending
that the ruler had given him permission. When the ruler found out, he said,
“How dutiful is Mi Tzu-hsia! For his mother’s sake he even forgot that he
was committing a crime making him liable to lose his feet!”
Another time the two of them took a stroll in an orchard. Mi Tzu-hsia
began eating a peach that he could not finish, and he gave the ruler the
other half to eat. The ruler remarked, “You love me so much that you would
even forget your own saliva taste and let me eat the rest of the peach!”
Later, however, envious fellow courtiers, spreading word that Mi Tzuhsia was actually devious and arrogant, succeeded in damaging his reputation; the ruler came to see his actions in a new light “This fellow once rode
in my coach under pretense of my order,” he told the courtiers angrily,
“and another time he gave me a half-eaten peach.” For the same actions
that had charmed the ruler when he was the favorite, Mi Tzu-hsia now had
to suffer the penalties. The fate of his feet depended solely on the strength
of his reputation.
In the beginning, you must work to establish a
reputation for one outstanding quality, whether generosity or honesty or cunning. This quality
sets you apart and gets other people to talk about you. You then make your
reputation known to as many people as possible (subtly, though; take care
to build slowly, and with a firm foundation), and watch as it spreads like
wildfire.
A solid reputation increases your presence and exaggerates your
strengths without your having to spend much energy. It can also create an
aura around you that will instill respect, even fear. In the fighting in the
North African desert during World War II, the German general Erwin
Rommel had a
reputation for cunning and for deceptive maneuvering that
struck terror into everyone who faced him. Even when his forces were depleted, and when British tanks outnumbered his by five to one, entire cities
would be evacuated at the news of his approach.
As they say, your reputation inevitably precedes you, and if it inspires
respect, a lot of your work is done for you before you arrive on the scene,
or utter a single word.
Your success seems destined by your past triumphs. Much of the sucLAW 5 41
42 LAW 5
cess of Henry Kissinger‘s shuttle diplomacy rested on his reputation for
ironing out differences; no one wanted to be seen as so unreasonable that
Kissinger could not sway him. A peace treaty seemed a fait accompli as
soon as Kissinger’s name became involved in the negotiations.
Make your reputation simple and base it on one sterling quality. This
single quality—-efiiciency, say, or seductiveness-—becomes a kind of calling
card that announces your presence and places others under a
spell. A reputation for honesty will allow you to practice all manner of deception.
Casanova used his reputation as a great seducer to pave the way for his future conquests; women who had heard of his powers became immensely
curious, and wanted to discover for themselves what had made him so romantically successful.
Perhaps you have already stained your reputation, so that you are prevented from establishing a new one. In such cases it is wise to associate
with someone whose image counteracts your own, using their good name
to whitewash and elevate yours. It is hard, for example, to erase a
reputation for dishonesty by yourself; but a
paragon of honesty can help. ‘Nixon
P. T. Barnum wanted to clean up a
reputation for promoting vulgar entertainment, he brought the singer jenny Lind over from Europe. She had a
stellar, high—class reputation, and the American tour Bamum sponsored for
her greatly enhanced his own image. Similarly the great robber barons of
nineteentlrcentury America were long unable to rid themselves of a
reputation for cruelty and mean-spiritedness. Only when they began collecting
art, so that the names ofMorgan and Frick became permanently associated
with those of da Vinci and Rembrandt, were they able to soften their unpleasant image.
Reputation is a treasure to be carefully collected and hoarded. Especially when you are first establishing it, you must protect it strictly, anticipating all attacks on it. Once it is solid, do not let yourself get angry or
defensive at the slanderous comments of your enemies—that reveals insecurity, not confidence in your reputation. Take the high road instead, and
never appear desperate in your self—defense. On the other hand, an attack
on another man’s reputation is a potent weapon, particularly when you
have less power than he does. He has much more to lose in such a battle,
and your own thus~far-small reputation gives him a. small target when he
tries to return your fire. Bamum used such campaigns to geat effect in his
early career. But this tactic must be practiced with skill; you must not seem
to engage in petty vengeance. If you do not break your enemy’s reputation
cleverly, you will inadvertently ruin your own.
Thomas Edison, considered the inventor who harnessed electricity,
believed that a workable system would have to be based on direct current (DC). When the Serbian scientist Nikola Tesla appeared to have succeeded in creating a system based on alternating current (AC), Edison was
furious. He determined to ruin Tesla’s reputation, by making the public believe that the AC system was inherently unsafe, and Tesla irresponsible in
promoting it.
To this end he captured all kinds of household pets and electrocuted
them to death with an AC current. When this wasn’t enough, in 1890 he got
New York State prison authorities to organize the world’s first execution by
electrocution, using an AC current. But Edison’s electrocution experiments
had all been with small creatures; the charge was too weak, and the man
was only half killed. In perhaps the country’s cruelest state-authorized exe
cufion, the procedure had to be repeated. It was an awful spectacle.
Although, in the long run, it is Edison’s name that has survived, at the
time his campaign damaged his own reputation more than Tesla’s. He
backed off. The lesson is simple-—never go too far in attacks like these, for
that will draw more attention to your own vengefulness than to the person
you are slandering. When your own reputation is solid, use subtler tactics,
such as satire and ridicule, to weaken your opponent while making you out
as a charming rogue. The mighty lion toys with the mouse that crosses his
path—any other reaction would mar his fearsome reputation.
Image:
A Mine Full of
Diamonds and Rubies.
You dug for it, you found it,
and your wealth is now assured.
Guard it with your life. Robbers and thieves
will appear from all sides. Never take your wealth
for granted, and constantly renew it—time
will diminish the jewels’ luster,
and bury them from sight.
Authority: Therefore I should wish our courtier to bolster up his inherent
worth with skill and cunning, and ensure that whenever he has to go where
he is a
stranger, he is preceded by a good reputation. 4 . . For the lame
which appears to rest on the opinions of many fosters a certain unshakable belief in a man’s worth which is then easily strengthened in minds
already thus disposed and prepared. {Baldassare Castiglione, 1478— 1529)
REVERSAL
There is no possible Reversal. Reputation is critical; there are no exceptions to this law. Perhaps, not caring what others think of you, you gain a
reputation for insolence and arrogance, but that can be a valuable image in
itself—0scar Wilde used it to great advantage. Since we must live in society and must depend on the opinions of others, there is nothing to be
gained by neglecting your reputation. By not caring how you are per»
ceived, you let others decide this for you. Be the master of your fate, and
also of your reputation.
LAW 5
‘
43
LAW
COURT ATTENTION
AT ALL COST
JUDGMENT
Everything is judged its appearance,‘ wlmt is unseen
counts for nothing. Never let yourself get lost in the
crowd, ihen, or buried in oblivicm. Stand out. Be amspicuous, at all cast. Make youmzlf a magnet of attention by appearing larger, more colmful, more mysterious
than the bland and timid masses.
PART I: SURROUND YOUR NAME WITH THE
SENSATIONAL AND SCANDALOUS
Draw attention to yourselfby creating an unforgettable, even controversial
image. Court scandal. Do anything to make yourself seem larger than life
and shine more brightly than those around you. Make no distinction between kinds ofattention—notoriety ofany sort will bringyon power. Better
to be slandered and attacked than ignored.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAVV
P. T. Barnum, America’s premier nineteenth-century showman, started his
career as an assistant to the owner of a circus, Aaron Turner. In 1836 the
circus stopped in Annapolis, Maryland, for a series of performances. On
the morning ofopening day, Barnum took a stroll through town, wearing a
new black suit. People started to follow him. Someone in the gathering
crowd shouted out that he was the Reverend Ephraim K. Avery, infamous
as a man acquitted of the charge of murder but still believed guilty by most
Americans. The angry mob tore off Bamum’s suit and was ready to lynch
him. After desperate appeals, Barnum finally convinced them to follow
him to the circus, where he could verify his identity.
Once there, old Turner confirmed that this was all a practical joke-—he
himself had spread the rumor that Barnum was Avery. The crowd dis—
persed, but Barnum, who had nearly been killed, was not amused. He
wanted to know what could have induced his boss to play such a trick. “My
dear Mr. Barnum,” Turner replied, “it was all for our good. Remember, all
we need to ensure success is notoriety.” And indeed everyone in town was
talking about the joke, and the circus was packed that night and every night
it stayed in Annapolis. Barnum had learned a lesson he would never forget.
Bamum‘s first big venture of his own was the American Museum——a
collection of curiosities, located in New York. One day a beggar approached Bamum in the street. Instead of giving him money, Bamum decided to employ him. Taking him back to the museum, he gave the man
live bricks and told him to make a slow circuit of several blocks. At certain
points he was to lay down a brick on the sidewalk, always keeping one
brick in hand. On the return journey he was to replace each brick on the
street with the one he held. Meanwhile he was to remain serious of countenance and to answer no questions. Once back at the museum, he was to
enter, walk around inside, then leave through the back door and make the
same bricklaying circuit again.
On the man’s first walk through the streets, several hundred people
watched his mysterious movements. By his fourth circuit, onlookers
swarmed around him, debating what he was doing. Every time he entered
the museum he was followed by people who bought tickets to keep watch»
ing him. Many of them were distracted by the museum’s collections, and
stayed inside. By the end of the first day, the brick man had drawn over a
'll|l» \\"AS|' SVI) ‘l'|l|".
l*’ltI'\t,.‘li
A wasp named Pin Tail
was long in quest of
some (Iced that would
make him forever
famous. So one day he
entered the king's
palace and slung the
little prince, who was in
hell. The prince awoke
with loud cries. The
king and his coumers
rushed in to see what
had happened. The
prince was yelling as
the warp stung him
again and again. The
cozmiers tried to catch
the warp, and each in
turn was stung. The
whole myalh0u.s'1zhnld
rushed in, the news
soon spread, and
people flocked lo the
palace. The city was in
an uproar, all l)m'iue.\'.\‘
Sll.S'[l€N(l(.’d. Said the
wasp to itself before it
expired from its efforts.
“A name without/J1me
is like/ire wilhuul
flame. There is Iwthirrg
like attracting notzce at
any cost.
"
INDIAN 1-ABLE
LAW 6
I
45
[Sum wlmt I'm milwl
uf. lgvt my (/(mm of
rmown.
Pu rim Am«,rIN(>.
l-1‘)ZAl55(»
'l‘tH. I «)1 RI‘ l\R'H-I‘
A work that way Volume
tartly ;)u'.\mIml In u
prmce was bound to
seem in mime wuy
sprevizzl. '1'/iv arlirr
hinz.s’e[fm[g/it also /rvv
to attract the £rIl(m!i(1I!
vftlze court zhmugh his
he}2m’i'o:.u: in l/?1.\'ari'.\'
izrzig/11:31:! Smlmmi Wm
"wall knmw: hall: for
his prr.x‘mzuI ¢'ccenIri(imas and for his rv/Jmu~
(ion at 11 good prlirmir.
"
b’emu.\‘e Pope Leo X
“fmmd pI¢'u.\m‘r' In
.\‘llC/I .s‘rran_+;r*, /mrrn
hmined imlivitluu/.5‘. "
/w marlrl Sozfumu N
krzighl, mtm'n},{ the
mm to gr) c‘ump/('(e‘l_\/
(N11 oflizk miml. Van
Ma:zci3:'r_;"m4n(1 it odd
that the {7l’Ol1U(,‘I.$ of
('o.v9wli.\' Kort?! '5' r*Xp<'1'z~
nwmy in momlz and
foot pmnring wart‘
bz)u_;;h1 by norablar
permm "Iaevuu.\‘c of
their 0rl:I1'ry."yz'! Kvlvl
wax only adding a van‘
anon to vimx'lur experinwmtv by Tirmn, Ugu
(la Cnrpi zmtl I’a/ma
Grm-‘om’, wfm, &('t'r)r4l«
mg to Baiychini painter]
um}: riiesr fizigcvis‘
“hr-,rrIu.s'x> ihcy wi.~:he(/
to imitate the rmrthotl
14.3111 Iw [he .S'1lpn'Im.‘
Creator, "
Vim Mumlvr
46
‘
LAW 6
thousand people into the museum. A few days later the police ordered him
to cease and desist from his walks——the crowds were blocking traffic. The
bricklaying stopped but thousands of New Yorkers had entered the museum, and many of those had become P. T. Barnum converts.
Barnum would put a band of musicians on a balcony overlooking the
street, beneath a huge banner proclaiming FREE MUSIC FOR THE MILLIONS.
What generosity, New Yorkers thought, and they flocked to hear the free
concerts. But Barnum took pains to hire the worst musicians he could find,
and soon afier the band struck up, people would hurry to buy tickets to the
museum, where they would be out of earshot of the band’s noise, and of
the booing of the crowd.
One of the first oddities Barnum toured around the country wasjoice
Heth, a woman he claimed was 161 years old, and whom he advertised as a
slave who had once been George Washington’s nurse. After several
months the crowds began to dwindle, so Barnum sent an anonymous letter
to the papers, claiming that Heth was a clever fraud. ‘joice Heath,” he
wrote, “is not a human being but an automaton, made up of whalebone,
indie-rubber, and numberless springs.” Those who had not bothered to see
her before were immediately curious, and those who had already seen her
paid to see her again, to find out whether the rumor that she was a robot
was true.
In 1842, Barnum purchased the carcass of what was purported to be a
mermaid. This creature resembled a monkey with the body of a fish, but
the head and body were perfectly joined—it was truly a wonder. After
some research Barnum discovered that the creature had been expertly put
together injapan, where the hoax had caused quite a stir.
He nevertheless planted articles in newspapers around the country
claiming the capture of a mermaid in the Fiji Islands. He also sent the pa—
pers woodcut prints ofpaintings showing mermaids. By the time he showed
the specimen in his museum, a national debate had been sparked over the
existence of these mythical creatures. A few months before Batnum’s cam~
paign, no one had cared or even known about mermaids; now everyone
was talking about them as ifthey were real. Crowds flocked in record num»
bers to see the Fiji Mermaid, and to hear debates on the subject.
A few years later, Barnum toured Europe with General Tom Thumb. a
five-year—old dwarf from Connecticut whom Bamum claimed was an
elevenvyear-old English boy, and whom he had trained to do many remarkable acts. During this tour Bamum’s name attracted such attention
that Queen Victoria, that paragon of sobriety, requested a private audience
with him and his talented dwarf at Buckingham Palace. The English press
may have ridiculed Bamum, but Victoria was royally entertained by him,
and respected him ever after.
Interpretation
Barnum understood the fundamental truth about attracting attention:
Once people’s eyes are on you, you have a special legitimacy. For Barnum,
creating interest meant creating a crowd; as he later wrote, “Every crowd
has a silver lining.” And crowds tend to act in conjunction. If one person
stops to see your beggarman laying bricks in the street, more will do the
same. They will gather like dust bunnies. Then, given a gentle push, they
will enter your museum or watch your show. To create a crowd you have to
do something different and odd. Any kind of curiosity will serve the purpose, for crowds are magnetically attracted by the unusual and inexplicable. And once you have their attention, never let it go. If it veers toward
other people, it does so at your expense. Barnum would ruthlessly suck at~
tention from his competitors, knowing what a valuable commodity it is.
At the beginning of your rise to the top, then, spend all your energy on
attracting attention. Most important: The quality of the attention is irrele
vant. No matter how badly his shows were reviewed, or how slanderously
personal were the attacks on his hoaxes, Barnum would never complain. If
a
newspaper critic reviled him particularly badly, in fact, he made sure to
invite the man to an opening and to give him the best seat in the house. He
would even write anonymous attacks on his own work, just to keep his
name in the papers. From Bamum’s vantage, attentionwwhether negative
or positive——was the main ingredient of his success. The worst fate in the
world for a man who yearns fame, glory, and, of course, power is to be
ignored.
Ifthe cou.m'er happens to engage in arms in some public spectacle
such as jausting . . . he will ensure that the home he has is beautifully
caparisoned, that he himselfis suitably attired, with appropriate
mentors and ingenious mines to attract the eyes qfthe onlookers
in his direction as surely as the ladeswne attracts iron.
Halzlr1.s.wn> (Irz.tl2T,grli01zr2, I 4 78- I 529
KEYS TO POWER
Burning more brightly than those around you is a skill that no one is born
with. You have to learn to attract attention, “as surely as the lodestone at~
tracts iron.” At the start ofyour career, you must attach your name and reputation to a quality, an image, that sets you apart from other people. This
image can be something like a characteristic style of dress, or a personality
quirk that amuses people and gets talked about. Once the image is estalr
lished, you have an appearance, a place in the sky for your star.
It is a common mistake to imagine that this peculiar appearance of
yours should not be controversial, that to be attacked is somehow bad.
Nothing could be further from the truth. To avoid being a flash in the pan,
and having your notoriety eclipsed by another, you must not discriminate
between different types of attention; in the end, every kind will work in
your favor. Barnum, we have seen, welcomed personal attacks and felt
no need to defend himself. He deliberately courted the image of being a
humbug.
reports (/1111 (}r7s'sa<'rr
attracted the attention
of ljmpumr Clmrlcs V
by wearing ufamu.v1it‘
paper <,'()si‘1un:e. In
doing so he was adopt»
mg the tactics tl.$‘€(/ by
Di:zocrr1Ie.s'. who. in
order to gain (ZC(‘L’.l‘S' In
Altczmmler the Great. is
suit! to have appeared
di.rgL1isc(1 as the rmkt-cf
Ht'r.':ule.x wlzm the
monarch was xittizzg in
jzrdgnzciiz.
!‘H§€ <,‘()UR’l’ mrris‘i‘.
MARTIN VVARNKE.
l993
LAW6 .1 47
LAW 6
The court of Louis XIV contained many talented writers, artists, great
beauties, and men and women of impeccable virtue, but no one was more
talked about than the singular Due de Lauzun. The duke was short, almost
dwarfish, and he was prone to the most insolent kinds of behavior-—he
slept with the king’s mistress, and openly insulted not only other courtiers
but the king himself. Louis, however, was so beguiled by the duke’s eccen~
tricities that he could not beat his absences from the court. It was simple:
The strangeness of the duke’s character attracted attention. Once people
were enthralled by him, they wanted him around at any cost.
Society craves larger-than-life figures, people who stand above the
general mediocrity. Never be afraid, then, of the qualities that set you apart
and draw attention to you. Court controversy, even scandal. It is better to
be attacked, even slandered, than ignored. All professions are ruled by this
law, and all professionals must have a bit of the showman about them.
The great scientist Thomas Edison knew that to raise money he had to
remain in the public eye at any cost. Almost as important as the inventions
themselves was how he presented them to the public and courted attention.
Edison would design w'sual1y dazzling experiments to display his dis~
coveries with electricity. He would talk of future inventions that seemed
fantastic at the time-—robots, and machines that could photograph
thought—-and that he had no intention of wasting his energy on, but that
made the public talk about him. He did everything he could to make sure
that he received more attention than his great rival Nikola Tesla, who may
actually have been more brilliant than he was but whose name was far less
known. In 1915, it was rumored that Edison and Tesla would be joint recipients of that year’s Nobel Prize in physics. The prize was eventually given to
a pair of English physicists; only later was it discovered that the prize committee had actually approached Edison, but he had turned them down, re-v
fusing to share the prize with Tesla. By that time his fame was more secure
than Tesla’s, and he thought it better to refuse the honor than to allow his
rival the attention that would have come even from sharing the prize.
If you find yourself in a
lowly position that offers little opportunity for
you to draw attention, an effective trick is to attack the most visible, most
famous, most powerful person you can find. When Pietro Aretino, a
young
Roman servant boy of the early sixteenth century, wanted to get attention
as a writer of verses, he decided to publish a series of satirical poems rid}
culing the pope and his affection for a pet elephant. The attack put Aretino
in the public eye immediately. A slanderous attack on a
person in a position ofpower would have a similar effect. Remember, however, to use such
tactics sparingly after you have the public’s attention, when the act can
wear thin.
Once in the limelight you must constantly renew it by adapting and
varying your method of courting attention. If you don’t, the public will
grow tired, will take you for granted, and will move on to a newer star. The
game requires constant vigilance and creativity. Pablo Picasso never al
lowed himself to fade into the background; if his name became too at
tached to a particular style, he would deliberately upset the public with a
new series of paintings that went against all expectations. Better to create
something ugly and disturbing, he believed, than to let viewers grow too familiar with his work. Understand: People feel superior to the person whose
actions they can predict. If you show them who is in control by playing
against their expectations, you both gain their respect and lighten your hold
on dreir fleeting attention.
I m a
g
e :
The Limelight. The
actor who steps into this bxil»
liant light attains a heightened
presence. All eyes are on him. There
is room for only one actor at a time in
the limelight’s narrow beam; do whatever it takes to make yourself its focus.
Make your gestures so large, amusing, and scandalous that the
light stays on you while the
other actors are left in
the shadows.
Authority: Be ostentatious and
be seen. . . . What is not seen is
as though it did not exist. . . . It
was light that first caused all creation to shine forth. Display fills
up many blanks, covers up deficiencies, and gives everything
a second life, especially when it
is backed by genuine merit.
(Baltasar Gracién, 16014658)
LAW 6 349
LAW 6
PART II: CREATE AN AIR OF MYSTERY
In a world gmwing increasingly banal aindpfamiliai; what seems enigmatic instantly draws attention. Never make it too clear what you are
doing or about to do. Do not show allyour canis, /in air of mystery heightens your presence; it also creates anticipation--everyone will be watching
you to see what happens next. Use mystery to beguile, seduce, evenfrighten.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
Beginning in 1905, rumors started to spread throughout Paris of a
young
Oriental girl who danced in a private home, wrapped in veils that she gradually discarded. A local journalist who had seen her dancing reported that
“a woman from the Far East had come to Europe laden with perfume and
jewels, to introduce some ofthe richness of the Oriental colour and iife into
the satiated society of European cities.” Soon everyone knew the dam:er’s
name: Mata Han‘.
Early that year, in the winter, small and select audiences would gather
in a salon filled with Indian statues and other relics while an orchestra
played music inspired by Hindu and Javanese melodies. After keeping the
audience waiting and wondering, Mata Hari would suddenly appear, in a
startling costume: a white cotton brassiere covered with India.n~type jewels;
jeweled bands at the waist supporting a
sarong that revealed as much as it
concealed; bracelets up the arms. Then Mata Hari would dance, in a style
no one in France had seen before, her whole body swaying as if she were in
a trance. She told her excited and curious audience that her dances told
stories from Indian mythology and javanese folktales. Soon the cream of
Paris, and ambassadors from far—off lands, were competing for invitations
to the salon, where it was rumored that Mata. Hari was actually performing
sacred dances in the nude.
The public wanted to know more about her. She told journalists that
she was actually Dutch in origin, but had grown up on the island ofjava.
She would also talk about time spent in India, how she had learned sacred
Hindu dances there, and how Indian women “can shoot straight, ride
horseback, and are capable of doing logarithms and talk philosophy.” By
the summer of 1905, although few Parisians had actually seen Mata Hari
dance, her name was on everyone’s lips.
As Mata Hari gave more interviews, the story of her origins kept
changing: She had grown up in India, her grandmother was the daughter
of ajavanese princess, she had lived on the island of Sumatra where she
had spent her time “horsebaxzk riding, gun in hand, and risking her life.”
No one knew certain about her, butjournalists did not mind these
changes in her biography. They compared her to an Indian goddess, a
creature from the pages of Baudelaire—whatever their imagination wanted
to see in this mysterious woman from the East.
In August of 1905, Mata Hari performed for the first time in public.
Crowds thronging to see her on opening night caused a riot. She had now
become a cult figure, spawning many imitations. One reviewer wrote,
“Mata Hari personifies all the poetry of India, its mysticism, its voluptuousness, its hypnotizing charm.” Another noted, “IfIndia possesses such unexpected treasures, then all Frenchmen will emigrate to the shores of the
Ganges.”
Soon the fame of Mata Hari and her sacred Indian dances spread beyond Paris. She was invited to Berlin, Vienna, Milan. Over the next few
years she performed throughout Europe, mixed with the highest social circles, and earned an income that gave her an independence rarely enjoyed
by a woman of the period. Then, near the end of World War I, she was arrested in France, tried, convicted, and finally executed as a German spy.
Only during the trial did the truth come out: Mata Hari was not from java
or India, had not grown up in the Orient, did not have a drop of Eastern
blood in her body. Her real name was Margaretha Zelle, and she came
from the stolid northern province of Friesland, Holland.
Interpretation
When Margaretha Zelle arrived in Paris, in 1904, she had half a franc in
her pocket. She was one of the thousands of beautiful young girls who
flocked to Paris every year, taking work as artists’ models, nightclub
dancers, or vaudeville performers at the Folies Bergére. After a few years
they would inevitably be replaced by younger girls, and would often end
up on the streets, turning to prostitution, or else returning to the town they
came from, older and chastened.
Zelle had higher ambitions. She had no dance experience and had
never performed in the theater, but as a
young girl she had traveled with
her family and had witnessed local dances in Java and Sumatra. Zelle
clearly understood that what was important in her act was not the dance itself, or even her face or figure, but her ability to create an air of mystery
about herself. The mystery she created lay not just in her dancing, or her
costumes, or the stories she would tell, or her endless lies about her origins;
it lay in an atmosphere enveloping everything she did. There was nothing
you could say for sure about her——she was always changing, always surprising her audience with new costumes, new dances, new stories. This air
of mystery left the public always wanting to know more, always wondering
about her next move. Mata Hari was no more beautiful than many of the
other young girls who came to Paris, and she was not a particularly good
dancer. What separated her from the mass, what attracted and held the
public’s attention and made her famous and wealthy, was her mystery.
People are enthralled by mystery; because it invites constant interpretation, they never tire of it. The mysterious cannot be grasped. And what
cannot be seized and consumed creates power.
LAW 6 f51
52 LAW 6
KEYS TO POWER
In the past, the world was filled with the terrifying and unknowable—
diseases, disasters, capricious despots, the mystery of death itself. What we
could not understand we reimagined as myths and spirits. Over the centuries, though, we have managed, through science and reason, to illuminate the darkness; what was mysterious and forbidding has grown familiar
and comfortable. Yet this light has a price: in a world that is ever more
banal, that has had its mystery and myth squeezed out of it, we secretly
crave enigmas, people or things that cannot be instantly interpreted,
seized, and consumed.
That is the power of the mysterious: It invites layers of interpretation,
excites our imagination, seduces us into believing that it conceals something marvelous. The world has become so familiar and its inhabitants so
predictable that what wraps itself in mystery will almost always draw the
limelight to it and make us watch it.
Do not imagine that to create an air of mystery you have to be grand
and awe~inspirlng. Mystery that is woven into your day-to-day demeanor,
and is subtle, has that much more power to fascinate and attract attention.
Remember: Most people are upfront, can be read like an open book, take
little care to control their words or image, and are hopelessly predictable.
By simply holding back, keeping silent, occasionally uttering arnbiguous
phrases, deliberately appearing inconsistent, and acting odd in tlie subtlest
of ways, you will emanate an aura of mystery. The people around you will
then magnify that aura by constantly dying to interpret you.
Both artists and con artists understand the vital link between being
mysterious and attracting interest. Count Victor Lustig, the aristocrat of
swindlers, played the game to perfection. He was always doing things that
were different, or seemed to make no sense. He would show up at the best
hotels in a limo driven by ajapanese chauffeur; no one had ever seen a
Japanese chauffeur before, so this seemed exotic and strange. Lustig would
dress in the most expensive clothing, but always with something—a medal,
a flower, an arrnband—out of place, at least in conventional terms. This
was seen not as tasteless but as odd and intriguing. In hotels he would be
seen receiving telegrams at all hours, one afier the other, brought to him by
his Japanese chauffeur—telegrams he would tear up with utter nonchalance. (In fact they were fakes, completely blank.) He would sit alone in the
dining room, reading a
large and impressive-looking book, smiling at people yet remaining aloof. Vlfithin a few days, of course, the entire hotel
would be abuzz with interest in this strange man.
All this attention allowed Lustig to lure suckers in with ease. They
would beg for his confidence and his company. Everyone wanted to be
seen with this mysterious aristocrat. And in the presence of this distracting
enigma, they wouldn’t even notice that they were being robbed blind.
An air of mystery can make the mediocre appear intelligent and profound. It made Mata Hari, a woman of average appearance and intelligence, seem like a goddess, and her dancing divinely inspired. An air of
mystery about an artist makes his or her artwork immediately more intriguing, a trick Marcel Duchamp played to great effect. It is all very easy to
clo—-say little about your work, tease and titillate with alluring, even contra~
dictory comments, then stand back and let others try to make sense of it all.
Mysterious people put others in a kind of inferior position—-that of trying to figure them out. To degrees that they can control, they also elicit the
fear surrounding anything uncertain or unknown. All great leaders know
that an aura of mystery draws attention to them and creates an intimidating
presence. Mao Tse-rung, for example, cleverly cultivated an enigmatic
image; he had no worries about seeming inconsistent or contradicting him~
self-—fl1e very contradictoriness of his actions and words meant that he a.l~
ways had the upper hand. No one, not even his own wife, ever felt they
understood him, and he therefore seemed larger than life. This also meant
that the public paid constant attention to him, ever anxious to witness his
next move.
If your social position prevents you from completely wrapping your
actions in mystery, you must at least learn to make yourself less obvious.
Every now and then, act in a way that does not mesh with other people’s
perception of you. This way you keep those around you on the defensive,
eliciting the kind of attention that makes you powerful. Done right, the ore
ation of enigma. can also draw the kind of attention that strikes terror into
your enemy.
During the Second Punic War (219402 13.0.), the great Carthaginian
general Hannibal was wreaking havoc in his march on Rome. Hannibal
was known for his cleverness and duplicity.
Under his leadership Carthage’s army, though smaller than those of
the Romans, had constantly outmaneuvered them. On one occasion,
though, Hann1‘bal’s scouts made a horrible blunder, leading his troops into
a marshy terrain with the sea at their back. The Roman army blocked the
mountain passes that led inland, and its general, Fabius, was ecstatic-at
last he had Hannibal trapped. Posting his best sentries on the passes, he
worked on a plan to destroy Hannibal’s forces. But in the middle of the
night, the sentries looked down to see a mysterious sight: A huge procession of lights was heading up the mountain. Thousands and thousands of
lights. If this was Hannibal’s army, it had suddenly grown a hundredfold.
The sentries argued heatedly about what this could mean: Reinforcements from the sea? Troops that had been hidden in the area? Ghosts? No
explanation made sense.
As they watched, fires broke out all over the mountain, and a horrible
noise drified up to them from below, like the blowing of a million horns.
Demons, they thought. The sentries, the bravest and most sensible in the
Roman army, fled their posts in a panic.
By the next day, Hannibal had escaped from the marshland. What was
his trick? Had he really conjured up demons? Actually what he had done
was order bundles of twigs to be fastened to the horns of the thousands of
oxen that traveled with his troops as beasts of burden. The twigs were then
LAW6 3 53
lit, giving the impression of the torches of a vast army heading up the
mountain. When the flames burned down to the oxen’s skin, they stampeded in all directions, bellowing like mad and setting fires all over the
mountainside. The key to this device’s success was not the torches, the
fires, or the noises in themselves, however, but the fact that Hannibal had
created a puzzle that captivated the sentries’ attention and gradually terrified them. From the mountaintop there was no way to explain this bizarre
sight. If the sentries could have explained it they would have stayed at their
posts.
If you find yourself trapped, cornered, and on the defensive in some
situation, try a simple experiment: Do something that cannot be easily explained or interpreted. Choose a simple action, but carry it out in a way
that unsettles your opponent, a way with many possible interpretations,
making your intentions obscure. Don’t just be unpredictable (although this
tactic too can be successful—see Law 17); like Hannibal, create a scene that
cannot be read. There will seem to be no method to your madness, no
rhyme or reason, no single explanation. If you do this right, you will inspire fear and trembling and the sentries will abandon their posts. Call it
the “feigned madness ofHamlet” tactic, for Hamlet uses it to great effect in
Shakespeare‘s play, frightening his stepfather Claudius through the mystery of his behavior. The mysterious makes your forces seem larger, your
power more terrifying.
Image: The Dance of
the \/'cils~-—-thcz veils
envelop the dancer.
What they reveal
causes excitement,
What they conceal
heightens interest. The
essence of mystery.
Authority: If you do not declare yourself immediately, you arouse
expectation. . . . Mix a little mystery with everything, and the very
mystery stirs up veneration. And when you explain, be not too explicit. . . . In this manner you imitate the Divine way when you
cause men to wonder and watch. (Baltasar Gracian, 1601-1658)
.9‘) LAW 6
R EVF. RSAL
In the beginning of your rise to the top, you must attract attention at all
cost, but as you rise higher you must constantly adapt. Never wear the public out with the same tactic. An air of mystery works wonders for those who
need to develop an aura of power and get themselves noticed, but it must
seem measured and under control. Mata Hari went too far with her fabrications; although the accusation that she was a
spy was false, at the time it
was a reasonable presumption because all her lies made her seem suspicious and nefarious. Do not let your air of mystery be slowly transformed
into a
reputation for deceit. The mystery you create must seem a
game,
playful and unthreatening. Recognize when it goes too far, and pull back.
There are times when the need for attention must be deferred, and
when scandal and notoriety are the last things you want to create. The attention you attract must never offend or challenge the reputation of those
above you—not, at any rate, if they are secure. You will seem not only paltry but desperate by comparison. There is an art to knowing when to draw
notice and when to withdraw.
Lola Montez was one of the great practitioners of the art of attracting
attention. She managed to rise from a middle—class Irish background to
being the lover of Franz Liszt and then the mistress and political adviser of
King Ludwig of Bavaria. In her later years, though, she lost her sense of
proportion.
In London in 1850 there was to be a performance of Shakespeare’s
Macbeth featuring the greatest actor of the time, Charles john Kean. Everyone of consequence in English society was to be there; it was rumored that
even Queen Victoria and Prince Albert were to make a public appearance.
The custom of the period demanded that everyone be seated before the
queen anived. So the audience got there a little early, and when the queen
entered her royal box, they observed the convention of standing up and
applauding her. The royal couple waited, then bowed. Everyone sat down
and the lights were dimmed. Then, suddenly, all eyes turned to a box opposite Queen Victoria’s: A woman appeared from the shadows, taking her
seat later than the queen. It was Lola Montez. She wore a diamond tiara on
her dark hair and a
long fur coat over her shoulders. People whispered in
amazement as the ermine cloak was dropped to reveal a low-necked gown
of crimson velvet. By turning their heads, the audience could see that the
royal couple deliberately avoided looking at Lola’s box. They followed
Victoria’s example, and for the rest of the evening Lola Montez was ignored. After that evening no one in fashionable society dared to be seen
with her. All her magnetic powers were reversed. People would flee her
sight. Her future in England was finished.
Never appear overly greedy for attention, then, for it signals insecurity,
and insecurity drives power away. Understand that there are times when it
is not in your interest to be the center of attention. When in the presence of
a king or queen, for instance, or the equivalent thereof, bow and retreat to
the shadows; never compete.
LAW 6
I
55
56
LAW
GET OTHERS TO DO THE
WORK FOR YOU, BUT,
ALWAYS TAKE THE CREDIT
JUDGMENT
Use the wisdom, knowledge, and legwork of other people
tofurther your own cause. Not only will such assistance
save you valuable time and energy, it will give you a
godlike aura of qfficiency and speed. In the end your
helpers will be forgotten and you will be remembeml.
Never do yourself what others can dofor you.
TRANSGRESSION AND OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
In 1883 a
young Serbian scientist named Nikola Tesla was working for the
European division of the Continental Edison Company. He was a brilliant
inventor, and Charles Batchelor, a plant manager and a personal friend of
Thomas Edison, persuaded him he should seek his fortune in America, giving him a letter of introduction to Edison himself. So began a life of woe
and tribulation that lasted until Tesla’s death.
When Tesla met Edison in New York, the famous inventor hired him
on the spot. Tesla worked eighteen-hour days, finding ways to improve the
primitive Edison dynarnos. Finally he offered to redesign them completely.
To Edison this seemed a monumental task that could last years without
paying off, but he told Tesla, “’I'here’s fifty thousand dollars in it for you-—xf
you can do it.” Tesla labored day and night on the project and after only a
year he produced a greatly improved version of the dynamo, complete
with automatic controls. He went to Edison to break the good news and receive his $50,000. Edison was pleased with the improvement, for which he
and his company would take credit, but when it came to the issue of the
money he told the young Serb, “Tesla, you don’t understand our American
lmmori,” and offered a small raise instead.
Tesla’s obsession was to create an alternating-current system (AC) of
electricity. Edison believed in the direct—current system (DC), and not only
refused to support Tesla’s research but later did all he could to sabotage
him. Tesla turned to the great Pittsburgh magnate George Westinghouse,
who had started his own electricity company. Westinghouse completely
funded Tesla’: research and offered him a
generous royalty agreement on
future profits. The AC system Tesla developed is still the standard today-—
but after patents were filed in his name, other scientists came forward to
take credit for the invention, claiming that they had laid the groundwork
for him. His name was lost in the shuffle, and the public came to associate
the invention with Westinghouse himself.
A year later, Westinghouse was caught in a mkeover bid from
_}. Pierpont Morgan, who made him rescind the generous royalty contract
he had signed with Tesla. Westinghouse explained to the scientist that his
company would not survive if it had to pay him his full royalties; he persuaded Tesla to accept a buyout of his patents for $216,000-—a large sum,
no doubt, but far less than the $12 million they were worth at the time. The
financiers had divested Tesla of the riches, the patents, and essentially the
credit for the greatest invention of his career.
The name of Guglielmo Marconi is forever linked with the invention
ofradio. But few know that in producing his invention-——he broadcast a
signal across the English Channel in 1899--Marconi made use of a patent
Tesla had filed in 1897, and that his work depended on Tesla’.-i research.
Once again Tesla received no money and no credit. Tesla invented an induction motor as well as the AC power system, and he is the real “father of
radio.” Yet none of these discoveries bear his name. As an old man, he
lived in poverty.
THE T()RT()lSE. 'l'Hl-I
l7I.F.l"llA\$T AND Till’.
l[|l‘P()l‘U'l‘A\’|l B
One day lite rorloise
met the elephant. who
trumpeted, "Our ofmy
way, you wmkling—
I might step on you!”
The tortoise was not
afraid and stayed
where he was, so the
elephant stepped on
him, but could not
crush him. “Do not
boast, Mr. Elephant, 1
am as strong as you
are.’ "
said the tortoise,
bu! the elephant just
laughed. So the tortoise
asked him :0 come
to his hill the nexi
morning.
The next day, before
sunrise, the tortoise ran
down the hill to (he
river, where he met the
hippopotamus, who
waxjust on his way
back into the water
after his rtoclurmzl
_feading. “Mr Hippo!
Shall we have a
rug~ofwar? I box I’m as
strong as you are!”
said {he tortoise. The
hippopotamus laughed
at this ridiculous idea,
but agreed. The tortoise
produced a long rope
and told /he hippo to
hold it in his mouth
until the tortoise
shouted “Hey!”
Then the turlaiie run
back up the hill where
he found the elephant,
who was getting impatient. He gave the
clcpham Ihe arher end
of the rape and said,
“When Isay ‘Hey!’
pull, and you'll see
which afus is the
strongest." Then he ran
halfway back down the
LAW 7
-
57
hill, to nplai'1' wlivrfl hp
muldn ‘I be smrv. am]
.s'hmm’d. “lI(,'_v./" T/14*
clephunl and [he
/xip[mpv!urrm.\‘ pulled
mizlpullezl. hut rm/‘llwr
um/(I Iimlge I/14'
urlw/——Ilu'y were of
e-qua! xrrmgrli. '1'/zev
bath ngrwrl that rim
t0rI0i.s‘H wax as xtrmzg:
ax I/zr’_\' wen’.
Never (In what orlwri‘
am (In for you. The turrm'\'e let nllirrs do the
work for him while he
go! [ire 4 redil.
Z.-sxRr.i\N mm E:
in be sure, if Ihr lumler
reiivs on i/i(’ .st'citrz'Iy of
lite c:irria_ce, utilizes lite
legs Iaftlte Sl.\' /I()75(‘.§',
and trinkets Wang Lirmg
hold 15??!’ rrms; than he
will not tin‘ l1iII1A‘(‘lf
and willfirzd if vu.s'_v to
overtake .sw:'ft rIlZtl)l(!l.s‘.
.'Vnw .w1p[1<2.s'ing hr’
di.icura'€d 1/“! ml V1111-
rage n_/‘the carriage,
gzn-1: up the us’ It! legs’
nfthe Imrscs mm’ the
,s'k1ilo_fl:Vurt,g- Liang,
und ulzg/11011 10 nm
after Illt,’ zmimals; then
even llmugiz his legs‘
wart: (IS quit’/c as Lou
C1153‘. he would M.-at he
in time In ovcrlu/LU the
animals‘. In fact, l]'g:onrl
Izrznvux and .s‘tIUng
vzlrriagm are taken mm
rm-, then now Immimcn um! Imrtrlwrmmn
will be gum] vnouglz Io
z'zm'l: Ilw uizimulx.
l'lAI\~l'[~l«|‘7l7,
(‘nIr\|,s|. vn1J,<>s0I'm,R,
11111:!) (‘I .N‘l‘lV){V’ n.('.
58 LAW 7
In 1917, during his later impoverished years, Tesla was told he was to
receive the Edison Medal of the American Institute ofElectrical Engineers.
He turned the medal down. “You propose,” he said, “to honor me with a
medal which I could pin upon my coat and strut for a vain hour before the
members of your Institute. You would decorate my body and continue to
let starve, for failure to supply recognition, my mind and its creative prod
ucts, which have supplied the foundation upon which the major portion of
your Institute exists.”
Interpretation
Many harbor the illusion that science, dealing with facts as it does, is be
yond the petty rivalries that trouble the rest of the world. Nikola Tesla was
one of those. He believed science had nothing to do with politics, and
claimed not to care for fame and riches. As he grew older, though, this ruined his scientific work. Not associated with any particular discovery, he
could attract no investors to his many ideas. While he pondered great inventions for the future, others stole the patents he had already developed
and got the glory for themselves.
He wanted to do everything on his own, but merely exhausted and impoverished himselfin the process.
Edison was Tesla’s polar opposite. He wasn’t actually much of a scien~
tific thinker or inventor; he once said that he had no need to be a mathematician because he could always hire one. That was Fdisoifs main
method. He was really a businessman and publicist, spotting the trends and
the opportunities that were out there, then hiring the best in the field to do
the work for him. If he had to he would steal from his competitors. Yet his
name is much better known than Tesla’s, and is associated with more inventions.
The lesson is twofold: First, the credit for an invention or creation is as
important, ifnot more important, than the invention itself. You must secure
the credit for yourself and keep others from stealing it away, or from piggy—
backing on your hard work. To accomplish this you must always be vigilant
and ruthless, keeping your creation quiet until you can be sure there are no
vultures circling overhead. Second, learn to take advantage of other people’s work to Further your own cause. Time is precious and life is short. If
you try to do it all on your own, you run yourself ragged, waste energy, and
burn yourself out. It is far better to conserve your forces, pounce on the
work others have done, and find a way to make it your own.
Everybody steals in commerce and industry.
I‘ma stolen a lot myself
But I know how to steal.
'l‘horn/Ls‘ I1’//lisrm, I847’ I931
KEYS TO POWER
The world of power has flue dynamics of the jungle: There are those who
live by hunting and killing, and there are also vast numbers of creatures
(hyenas, vultures) who live oil" the hunting of others. These latter, less
imaginative types are often incapable of doing the work that is essential for
the creation of power. They understand early on, though, that if they wait
long enough, they can always find another animal to do the work for them.
Do not be naive: At this very moment, while you are slaving away on some
project, there are vultures circling above trying to figure out a way to survive and even thrive off your creativity. It is useless to complain about this,
or to wear yourself ragged with bitterness, as Tesla did. Better to protect
yourself and join the game. Once you have established a
power base, become a vulture yourself, and save yourself a lot of time and energy.
Of the two poles ofthis game, one can be illustrated by the example of
the explorer Vasco Nunez de Balboa. Balboa had an obsessionw-the discovery ofEl Dorado, a
legendary city of vast riches.
Early in the sixteenth century, after countless hardships and brushes
with death, he found evidence of a great and wealthy empire to the south
of Mexico, in present—day Peru. By conquering this empire, the Incan, and
seizing is gold, he would make himself the next Cortes. The problem was
that even as he made this discovery, word of it spread among hundreds of
other conquistadors. He did not understand that half the game was keeping
it quiet, and carefiilly watching those around him. A few years after he discovered the location of the Incan empire, a soldier in his own army, Francisco Pizarro, helped to get him beheaded for treason. Pizarro went on to
take what Balboa had spent so many years trying to find.
The other pole is that of the artist Peter Paul Rubens, who, late in his
career, found himself deluged with requests for paintings. He created a
system: In his large studio he employed dozens of outstanding painters, one
specializing in robes, another in backgrounds, and so on. He created a vast
production line in which a
large number of canvases would be worked on
at the same time. When an important client visited the studio, Rubens
would shoo his hired painters out for the day. While the client watched
from a balcony, Rubens would work at an incredible pace, with unbelievable energy. The client would leave in awe of this prodigious man, who
could paint so many masterpieces in so short a time.
This is the essence of the Law: Loam to get others to do the work for
you while you take the credit, and you appear to be ofgodlike strength and
power. If you think it important to do all the work yourself, you will never
get far, and you will suffer the fate of the Balboas and Teslas of the world.
Find people with the skills and creativity you lack. Either hire them, while
putting your own name on top of theirs, or find a way to take their work
and make it your own. Their creativity thus becomes yours, and you seem
a genius to the world.
There is another application of this law that does not require the parasitic use of your contemporaries’ labor: Use the past, a vast storehouse of
fill \ll.l\l) lll’\
.4 /mt wl(.*.Ilm1IIm'Ihr'r
right. and wm m'<‘u.s'-
mum] In .31 m/c’/zin;: up
tlrv ewrlh in .\’z'ur<'I; of
femrl. ulihmzgll Mimi.
still umziltuuzl In
.vr‘m!r I1 rlmry mm! diii~
gt'ml_v. I)’/‘whm IN!’ wax
ir to Hit’ imln.\‘/rmu.»
I/(ml? Another’ \Imrpsig/IMI /WI) wlm x‘[mn'rI
luv’ I('mIz'r'f<’t'I rwwr
P1i‘l)l~’t'1rl {mm I1r.rLs‘ir!L’.
mad cir;oymt'. mrlmm
.\'r'r¢1!r'him,I. f}Y(’f!‘lliI of
1/11‘ vi/zcr".\‘ /u/‘am; Fm‘ us
u/rm us‘ I/It‘ blind hm
it t'aIr'/ml up It (7ur'/u_»-
mm, he/' m,m'/7_fII/
mmpumrm (lcmurml
H.
mm c 2.
GoH1im.nLlvssnm.
172‘) l7':4l
LAW 7 59
60‘ LAW 7
knowledge and wisdom. Isaac Newton called this “standing on the shoulders of giants.” He meant that in making his discoveries he had built on the
achievements of others. A great part of his aura of genius, he knew, was attributable to his shrewd ability to make the most of the insights of ancient,
medieval, and Renaissance scientists. Shakespeare borrowed plots, characterizations, and even dialogue from Plutarch, among other writers, for he
knew that nobody surpassed Plutarch in the writing of subtle psychology
and witty quotes. How many later writers have in their turn borrowed
from-~plagz'anlzed——Shakespeare?
We all know how few of today’s politicians write their own speeches.
Their own words would not win them a single vote; their eloquence and
wit, whatever there is of it, they owe to a speech writer. Other people
do the work, they take the credit. The upside of this is that it is a. kind
of power that is available to everyone. Learn to use the knowledge of the
past and you will look like a genius, even when you are really just a clever
borrower,
Writers who have delved into human nature, ancient masters of strategy, historians of human stupidity and folly, kings and queens who have
leamed the hard way how to handle the burdens of power—-their knowledge is gathering dust, waiting for you to come and stand on their shoulders. Their wit can be your wit, their skill can be your skill, and they will
never come around to tell people how unoriginal you really are. You can
slog through life, making endless mistakes, wasting time and energy trying
to do things from your own experience. Or you can use the armies of the
past. As Bismarck once said, “Fools say that they learn by experience. I
prefer to profit by others’ experience.”
Image: The Vulture. Of all the creatures in
the jungle, he has it the easiest. The
hard work of others becomes his work;
their failure to survive becomes his
nourishment. Keep an eye on
the Vulture—while you are
hard at work, he is circling above. Do not
fight him,join
him.
Authority: There is much to be known, life is short, and life is not life
without knowledge. It is therefore an excellent device to acquire
knowledge from everybody. Thus, by the sweat of 2mother’s brow, you
win the reputation of being an oracle. (Baltasar Gracién, 1601-1658)
REVERSAL
There are times when taking the credit for work that others have done is
not the wise course: If your power is not firmly enough established, you
will seem to be pushing people out of the limelight. To be a. brilliant exploiter of talent your position must be unshakable, or you will be accused
ofdeception.
Be sure you know when letting other people share the credit serves
your purpose. It is especially important to not be greedy when you have a
master above you. President Richard Nixon’s historic visit to the People’s
Republic of China was originally his idea, but it might never have come off
but for the deft diploma/cy of Henry Kissinger. Nor would it have been as
successful without Kissinger’s skills. Stilh when the time came to take
credit, Kissinger adroitly let Nixon take the lion’s share. Knowing that the
truth would come out later, he was careful not to jeopardize his standing in
the short term by hogging the limelight. Kissinger played the game ex~
partly: He took credit for the work of those below him while graciously
giving credit for his own labors to those above. That is the way to play
the game.
LAW 7 Q0:
LAW
MAKE OTHER PEOPLE
COME TO YOU—
USE BAIT IF NECESSARY
JUDG MENT
1/Wzen youforce the otherperson to act, you me the one in
control. It is always better to makeyour opponent come to
you, abandoning his own plans in the pmcess. Lure him
wit};fabulous gm‘ns——then attack. You hold the amls.
OBSERVANCl:‘ OF THE LAW
At the Congress ofVienna in 1814, the major powers ofEurope gathered to
carve up the remains of Napoleon’s fallen Empire. The city was full of gaiety and the balls were the most splendid in memory. Hovering over the
proceedings, however, was the shadow of Napoleon himself. Instead of
being executed or exiled far away, he had been sent to the island of Elba,
not far from the coast of Italy.
Even imprisoned on an island, a man as bold and creative as
Napoleon Bonaparte made everyone nervous. The Austrians plotted to kill
him on Elba, but decided it was too risky. Alexander I, Rnssia’s tempera»
mental czar, heightened the anxiety by throwing a {it during the congress
when a part of Poland was denied him: “Beware, I shall loose the monster!" he threatened. Everyone knew he meant Napoleon. Of all the states
men gathered in Vienna, only Talleyrand, Napoleon’s former foreign
minister, seemed calm and unconcerned. It was as if he knew something
the others did not.
Meanwhile, on the island ofElba, Napoleon's life was a mockery of his
previous glory. As Elba’s “king,” he had been allowed to form a court-—
there was a cook, a wardrobe mistress, an official pianist, and a. handful of
courtiers. All this was designed to humiliate Napoleon, and it seemed to
work.
That winter, however, there occurred a. series of events so strange and
dramatic they might have been scripted in a play. Elba was surrounded by
British ships, their cannons covering all possible exit points. Yet somehow,
in broad daylight on 26 February 1815, a ship with nine hundred men on
board picked up Napoleon and put to sea The English gave chase but the
ship got away. This almost impossible escape astonished the public
throughout Europe, and terrified the statesmen at the Congress ofVienna.
Although it would have been safer to leave Europe, Napoleon not only
chose to return to France, he raised the odds by marching on Paris with a
tiny army, in hopes of recapturing the throne. His strategy worked——people
of all classes threw themselves at his feet. An army under Marshal Ney sped
from Paris to arrest him, but when the soldiers saw their beloved former
leader, they changed sides. Napoleon was declared emperor again. Volunteers swelled the ranks ofhis new army. Delirium swept the country. In Paris,
crowds went wild. The king who had replaced Napoleon fled the country.
For the next hundred days, Napoleon ruled France. Soon, however, the
giddiness subsided. France was bankrupt, its resources nearly exhausted,
and there was little Napoleon could do about this. At the Battle ofWaterloo,
injune ofthat year, he was finally defeated for good. This time his enemies
had learned their lesson: They exiled him to the barren island ofSaint I-Ie~
lena, offthe west coast ofAfrica. There he had no more hope of escape.
Interpretation
Only years later did the facts of Napoleon's dramatic escape from Elba
come to light. Before he decided to attempt this bold move, visitors to his
court had told him that he was more popular in France than ever, and that
LAW 8 63
M LAW 8
the country would embrace him again. One of these visitors was Austria’s
General Keller, who convinced Napoleon that if he escaped, the European
powers, England included, would welcome him back into power. Napoleon
was tipped off that the English would let him go, and indeed his escape occurred in the middle of the afternoon, in full view ofEnglish spyglasses.
What Napoleon did not know was that there was a man behind it all,
pulling the strings, and that this man was his former minister, Talleyrand.
And Talleyrand was doing all this not to bring back the glory days but to
crush Napoleon once and for all. Considering the emperor’s ambition unsettling to Europe’s stability, he had turned against him long ago. When
Napoleon was exiled to Elba, Talleyrand had protested. Napoleon should
be sent farther away, he argued, or Europe would never have peace. But
no one Listened.
Instead of pushing his opinion, Talleyrand bided his time. Working
quietly, he eventually won over Castlereagh and Metternich, the foreign
ministers ofEngland and Austria.
Together these men baited Napoleon into escaping. Even Koller’s visit,
to whisper the promise ofglory in the exile’s ear, was part of the plan. Like
a master cardplayer, Talleyrand figured everything out in advance. He
knew Napoleon would fall into the trap he had set He also foresaw that
Napoleon would lead the country into a war, which, given France’s wea.k~
ened condition, could only last a few months. One diplomat in Vienna,
who understood that Talleyrand was behind it all, said, “He has set the
house ablaze in order to save it from the plague.”
When I havz laid baitfor deer,
I don? shout at thejirst doe that comes to sniff,
but wait until the whole herd has gathered round.
Otto mm Bismarck, IR] 5-I898
KEYS TO POWER
How many times has this scenario played itself out in history: An aggres~
sive leader initiates a series of bold moves that begin by bringing him
much power. Slowly, however, his power reaches a peak, and soon everything turns against him. His numerous enemies band together; trying to
maintain his power, he exhausts himself going in this direction and that,
and inevitably he collapses. The reason for this pattern is that the aggressive person is rarely in full control. He cannot see more than a couple of
moves ahead, cannot see the consequences of this bold move or that one.
Because he is constantly being forced to react to the moves of his evergrowing host of enemies, and to the unforeseen consequences of his own
rash actions, his aggressive energy is turned against him.
In the realm of power, you must ask yourself, what is the point of chasing here and there, trying to solve problems and defeat my enemies, if I
never feel in control? Why am I always having to react to events instead of
directing them? The answer is simple: Your idea of power is wrong. You
have mistaken aggressive action for effective action. And most often the
most effective action is to stay back, keep calm, and let others be frustrated
by the trips you lay for them, playing for long-term power rather than
quick victory.
Remember: The essence of power is the ability to keep the initiative,
to get others to react to your moves, to keep your opponent and those
around you on the defensive. When you make other people come to you,
you suddenly become the one controlling the situation. And the one who
has control has power. Two things must happen to place you in this position: You yourself must learn to master your emotions, and never to be influenced by anger; meanwhile, however, you must play on people’s natural
tendency to react angrily when pushed and baited. In the long run, the
ability to make others come to you is a weapon far more powerful than any
tool of aggression.
Study how Talleyrand, the master of the art, performed this delicate
trick. First, he overcame the urge to try to convince his fellow statesmen
that they needed to banish Napoleon far away. It is only natural to want to
persuade people by pleading your case, imposing your will with words. But
this often turns against you. Few of Talleyrand’s contemporaries believed
Napoleon was still a threat, so that if he had spent a lot of energy trying to
convince them, he would only have made himself look foolish. Instead, he
held his tongue and his emotions in check. Most important of all, he laid
Napoleon a sweet and irresistible trap. He knew the man’s weakness, his
impetuosity, his need for glory and the love of the masses, and he played
all this to perfection. When Napoleon went for the bait, there was no danger that he might succeed and turn the tables on Talleyrand, who better
than anyone knew France’s depleted state. And even had Napoleon been
able to overcome these difficulties, the likelihood of his success would have
been greater were he able to choose his time and place of action. By setting
the proper trap, Talleyrand took the time and place into his own hands.
All of us have only so much energy, and there is a moment when our
energies are at their peak. ‘When you make the other person come to you,
he wears himself out, wasting his energy on the trip. In the year 1905, Russia ancl japan were at war. The Japanese had only recently begun to mod
emize their warships, so that the Russians had a
stronger navy, but by
spreading false information the Japanese marshal Togo Heihachiro baited
the Russians into leaving their docks in the Baltic Sea, making them believe
they could wipe out the Japanese fleet in one swift attack. The Russian fleet
could not reachjapan by the quickest route——through the Strait of Gibral—
tar and then the Suez Canal into the Indian Ocean"-because these were
controlled by the British, and japan was an ally of Great Britain. They had
to go around the Cape of Good Hope, at the southern tip of Africa, adding
over more than six thousand miles to the voyage. Once the fleet passed the
Cape, the Japanese spread another false story: They were sailing to launch
a counterattack. So the Russians made the entirejourney tojapan on conr
bat alert. By the time they arrived, their seamen were tense, exhausted, and
overworked, while the Japanese had been waiting at their ease. Despite the
LAW 8 65
66 LAW 8
odds and their lack of experience in modem naval warfare, the Japanese
crushed the Russians.
One added benefit of making the opponent come to you, as the _]a.pa—
nese discovered with the Russians, is that it forces him to operate in your
territory. Being on hostile ground will make him nervous and often he will
rush his actions and make mistakes. For negotiations or meetings, it is always wise to lure others into your territory, or the territory of your choice.
You have your bearings, while they see nothing familiar and are subtly
placed on the defensive.
Manipulation is a dangerous game. Once someone suspects he is
being manipulated, it becomes harder and harder to control him. But
when you make your opponent come to you, you create the illusion that he
is controlling the situation. He does not feel the strings that pull hirmjust as
Napoleon imagined that he himself was the master of his daring escape and
return to power.
Everything depends on the sweetness of your bait. If your trap is at»
tractive enough, the turbulence of your enemies’ emotions and desires will
blind them to reality. The greedier they become, the more they can he led
around.
The great nineteenth-century robber baron Daniel Drew was a master
at playing the stock market. When he wanted a particular stock to be
bought or sold, driving prices up or down, he rarely resorted to the direct
approach. One of his tricks was to hurry through an exclusive club near
Wall Street, obviously on his way to the stock exchange, and to pull out his
customary red bandanna to wipe his perspiring brow. A slip of paper
would fall from this bandanna that he would pretend not to notice. The
club’s members were always trying to foresee Drew’s moves, and they
would pounce on the paper, which invariably seemed to contain an inside
up on a stock. Word would spread, and members would buy or sell the
stock in droves, playing perfectly into Drew’s hands.
If you can get other people to dig their own graves, why sweat yourself? Pickpockets work this to perfection. The key to picking a pocket is
knowing which pocket contains the wallet. Experienced pickpockets often
ply their trade in train stations and other places where there is a. clearly
marked sign reading BEWARE OF PICKPOCKE’l‘S. Passersby seeing the sign invariably feel for their wallet to make sure it is still there. For the watching
pickpockets, this is like shooting fish in a barrel. Pickpockets have even
been known to place their own BEWARE OF PICKPOCKETS signs to ensure
their success.
V/Vhen you are making people come to you, it is sometimes better to let
them know you are forcing their hand. You give up deception for overt manipulation. The psychological ramifications are profound: The person who
makes others come to him appears powerful, and demands respect.
Filippo Brunelleschi, the great Renaissance artist and architect, was a
great practitioner of the art of making others come to him as a
sign of his
power. On one occasion he had been engaged to repair the dome of the
Santa Maria del Fiore cathedral in Florence. The commission was impor-
lam and prestigious. But when the city officials hired a second man,
Lorenzo Ghibem‘, to work with B1-unelleschi, the great artist brooded in se~
cret. He knew that Ghiberti had gotten the job through his connections,
and that he would do none of the work and get half the credit. At a critical
moment ofthe construction, then, Brunelleschi suddenly developed a mysterious illness. He had to stop work, but pointed out to city officials that
they had hired Ghiberti, who should have been able to continue the work
on his own. Soon it became clear that Ghiberti was useless and the ofiicials
came begging to Brunelleschi. He ignored them, insisting that Ghiberti
should finish the project, until finally they realized the problem: They fired
Ghiberti.
By some miracle, Bnmelleschi recovered within days. He did not have
to throw a tantrum or make a fool of himself; he simply practiced the art of
“making others come to you.”
If on one occasion you make it a point of dignity that others must
come to you and you succeed, they will continue to do so even after you
stop trying.
Image: The Honcyed
Bear Trap. The bear hunter
does not chase his prey; a bear
that knows it is hunted is nearly
impossible to catch and is feroCiuus if cornered. Instead, the
hunter lays traps baited with
honey. He does not exhaust
himself and risk his life in
pursuit. He baits, then waits.
Authority: Good warriors make others
come to them, and do not go to others. This
is the principle of emptiness and fullness
of others and self. When you induce opponents to come to you, then their force is
always empty; as long as you do not
go to them. your force is always full. Attack
ing emptiness with fullness is like throwing
stones on eggs. (Zhang Yu. eleventh
century commentator on The Art 0/’ W11}
LAW 8 67
68 LAW 8
REVERSAL
Although it is generally the wiser policy to make others exhaust themselves
chasing you, there are opposite cases where strildng suddenly and aggressively at the enemy so demoralizes him that his energies sink. Instead of
making others come to you, you go to them, force the issue, take the lead.
Fast attack can be an awesome weapon, for it forces the other person to
react without the time to think or plan. With no time to think, people make
errors ofjudgment, and are thrown on the defensive. This tactic is the obverse of waiting and baiting, but it serves the same function: You make
your enemy respond on your terms.
Men like Cesare Borgia and Napoleon used the element of speed to intimidate ancl control. A rapid and unforeseen move is terrifying and demoralizing. You must choose your tactics depending on the situation. If
you have time on your side, and know that you and your enemies are at
least at equal strength, then deplete their strength by making them come to
you. Iftime is against you—-your enemies are weaker, and waiting will only
give them the chance to recover—-give them no such chance. Strike quickly
and they have nowhere to go. As the boxer Joe Louis put it, “He can run,
but he can’t hide.”
LA‘W
WIN THROUGH YOUR
ACTIONS, NEVER
THROUGH ARGUMENT
JUDGMENT
Any momentary triumph you think you have gained
through argument is really aPyrrhic victory: The 'resmt~
ment and ill willyau stir up is stronger and lasts longer
than any momentum‘ change ofopiuion. It is much more
powerful to get others to agree with you through your
actions, without saying a word. Demonstrate, do not
explicate.
69
llll \( l l\\ \\l>
Ill? \l/.l| It
A rrzwr hm! .vz'n’e'rI /1 is
mm rfnr .wHh" Ihirly
,\"<'ut.\ um! was kmzwn
um! 1IdI21I/'r(lfrrr Im
Inyulty. II‘uth/}lIm'\'\,
mu! I/l'\UlHm In (ind.
His /u1m'\'z’\. /lHIt'L't‘«'/.
hurl Hltfdt’ him lNtIl2_V
1'tmn{m in the r mm.
M-Im s']1rr*ud s(r;riu.\ of
I113’ rlu]1ii<‘iIt‘ mm‘
,'m;li<Iy '.Hiuy trtrrknl
on the ssrlim: may in
and dtly .-mi ecmii he (no
faint‘ so (l'('.\1m.s~r the
{mzmwtt vizier mu}
/iImN_v urrlcrcri the mm:
who Kurd wrwrl hfm so
waif in be [ml to rlemli.
In this malln, I/IUYL’
(‘UI1(f(’l)1IlL’(/ ll) rim]/I
wen’ rial up and
(:‘mm'n into rim pun
wlwrc I/1:’ mlmn Iwpt
/til‘ iim'c'r.vIl1ur)(in;,'
rlog.\. T/to r/ng.:.\‘ mm/ll
prrmzpily lmr 1111:
w'z'u'm In pzvrvv.
Bzjlmw l><'m_g tlumm m
111:4 rlrxgx. I'zmvm»w, Um
vi.:Ir'r 115319;! for om’ §<'E.\‘!
rergruzu ‘I vxtmld like
It'll thlfct‘ r(‘.\‘pfI(*.
"
11¢’
mic]. ".w mm I am; pay
my (f¢'IvI.\'. milmr any
nw/In rim‘ It) nu’.
/mu/w i/nu.» llmt [I('H])f(’
/mm‘ pm In my um’.
HlI1l.\‘/IHIL‘ (mi my gnmlx
unzrmy llw IIIHII/7r’r\‘ of
my /lumilv and m v rho’/—
.'IP‘(’Il mu! up/min! u
gmmliuu I‘r»r1/mm."
/lflvr n'w*i\ mg tlgI1:i7—
mum’ Jim! me vizier
wrmlzi not 11')‘ m r'§r‘rI;>r'.
r/w.\'z1iIrm grmum‘ this
!'(‘{}1I(‘.\.I.
The vizier imrriwi
immc, mlh*t1:’;l one
lumdntrl gold pin cs.
/hm pun! IF t’i.‘vif m the
lumrvmrm wlm Irmlwsf
after the mlmn
70 LAW 51
’['RAl\'S(.')RF.SSlON OF THE LAW
In 131 1313., the Roman consul Publius Crassus Dives Mucianus, laying
siege to the Greek town of Pergamus, found himself in need of a battering
ram to force through the town’s walls. He had seen a couple of hefty ship’s
masts in a shipyard in Athens a few days before, and he ordered that the
larger of these be sent to him immediately. The military engineer in Athens
who received the order felt certain that the consul really wanted the
smaller of the masts. He argued endlessly with the soldiers who delivered
the request: The smaller mast, he told them, was much better suited to the
task. And indeed it would be easier to transport.
The soldiers warned the engineer that their master was not a man to
argue with, but he insisted that the smaller mast would be the only one that
would work with a machine that he was constructing to go with it. He drew
diagram after diagram, and went so far as to say that he was the expert and
they had no clue what they were talking about. The soldiers knew their
leader and at last convinced the engineer that it would be better to swallow
his expertise and obey.
After they left, though, the engineer thought about it some more. What
was the point, he asked himself, in obeying an order that would lead to failure? And so he sent the smaller mast, confident that the consul would see
how much more effective it was and reward him justly.
When the smaller mast arrived, Mucianus asked his soldiers for an explanation. They described to him how the engineer had argued endlessly
for the smaller mast, but had finally promised to send the larger one. Mucianus went into a
rage. He could not concentrate on the siege, or consider
the importance of breaching the walls before the town received reinforce»
merits. All he could think about was the impudent engineer, whom he ordered to be brought to him immediately.
Arriving a few days later, the engineer gladly explained to the consul,
one more time, the reasons for the smaller mast He went on and on, using
the same arguments he had made with the soldiers. He said it was wise to
listen to experts in these matters, and if the attack was only tried with the
battering ram he had sent, the consul would not regret it Mucianus let him
finish, then had him stripped naked before the soldiers and flogged and
scourged with rods until he died.
Interpretation
The engineer, whose name has not been recorded by history, had spent his
life designing masts and pillars, and was respected as the finest engineer in
a city that had excelled in the science. He knew that he was right. A smaller
ram would allow more speed and carry more force. Larger is not necessarily better. Of course the consul would see his logic, and would eventually
understand that science is neutral and reason superior. How could the consul possibly persist in his ignorance ifthe engineer showed him detailed diagrams and explained the theories behind his advice?
The military engineer was the quintessence of the Arguer, at type
found everywhere among us. The Arguer does not understand that words
are never neutral, and that by arguing with a superior he impugns the intel
ligence of one more powerful than he. He also has no awareness ofthe person he is dealing with. Since each man believes that he is right, and words
will rarely convince him otherwise, the arguer’s reasoning falls on deaf
ears. When cornered, he only argues more, digging his own grave. Once
he has made the other person feel insecure and inferior in his beliefs, the
eloquence ofSocrates could not save the situation.
It is not simply a question of avoiding an argument with those who
stand above you. We all believe we are masters in the realm of opinions
and reasoning. You must be careful, then: Learn to demonstrate the correctness of your ideas indirectly.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
In 1502, in Florence, Italy, an enormous block of marble stood in the
works department of the church of Santa Maria del Fiore. It had once been
a magnificent piece of raw stone, but an unskillful sculptor had mistakenly
bored a hole through it where there should have been a
figure’s legs, generally mutilating it. Piero Soderini, Florence’s mayor, had contemplated
trying to save the block by commissioning Leonardo da Vinci to work on
it, or some other master, but had given up, since everyone agreed that the
stone had been ruined. So, despite the money that had been wasted on it, it
gathered dust in the dark halls of the church.
This was where things stood until some Florentine friends of the great
Michelangelo decided to write to the artist, then living in Rome. He alone,
they said, could do something with the marble, which was still magnificent
raw material. Michelangelo traveled to Florence, examined the stone, and
came to the conclusion that he could in fact carve a fine figure from it, by
adapting the pose to the way the rock had been mutilated. Soderini argued
that this was a waste of time——nobody could salvage such a disasterwbut
he finally agreed to let the artist work on it. Michelangelo decided he
would depict a. young David, sling in hand.
Weeks later, as Michelangelo was putting the final touches on the
statue, Soderini entered the studio. Fancying himself it bit of a connoisseur,
he .-studied the huge work, and told Michelangelo that while he thought it
was magnificent, the nose, he judged, was too big. Michelangelo realized
that Soderini was standing in 2 place right under the giant figure and did
not have the proper perspective. Without aword, he gestured for Soderini
to follow him up the scaffolding. Reaching the nose, he picked up his
as well as a bit of marble dust that lay on the planks. With Sodetini
just a few feet below him on the scaffolding. Michelangelo started to tap
lightly with the chisel, letting the bits of dust he had gathered in his hand to
fall little by little. He actually did nothing to change the nose, but gave
every appearance of working on it. After a few minutes of this charade he
stood aside: “Look at it now.” “I like it better,” replied Soderini, “you’ve
made it come alive.”
¢lu;;_\‘. Iin l);:[e'rr’(é‘ lhzy
man [/19 one izlirzrlred
gold _vi1>L'r'$ and srtili.
“Le! me («wk o:f:cr1}2(‘
dogs for ten da_v.\'.“ The
humslrmn (1__1;!e¢’¢1', and
for lbw !1(’Xl rm zlavx zinvizx'ier mrrtl for rlw
z’2m.x‘!.s‘ wilh grmi II!{(‘l2~
iiarr, _:;ru(Jmi/1gIhc/21
well lllIl1_f€l’diIlj,' them
lxanrlrn/1ze'I\'. By Jim (‘ltd
of:/ze Inn (lays rhcy
were rating out of lzir
hrlntl.
On the eleventh (lay lhv
vizzrr war called before
1/11’ Sultan, the churgm
were rcpmzted. and the
sultan wutcliecl as the
vizier was tied up and
thrown to lhff dugr Ye!
win»: the 1703.313 saw
him, tltrzr rsm up to him
with it-agging 11152.»: I¥1c_Y
rzihbferl ¢I}_'f2/clfomtlclv at
his rlrazzldens and
{vegan playirrgz mi}: 121'";
The sultan mid the
other wit/1e.«:r1',s* were
amazed, and flu‘ rulmn
asked 111:: vizier why Jhe
dog: had spare/1 in‘;
life. The vizier replica‘.
"I /zawz lvukvd after
I/1(’.\‘€ (logy fur ten dnyi:
T/w mlmn has .\1‘€Il llw
rm:/It_for lu‘m.rz'//T I
have [naked ziftcr you
for thirty ymzrx. and
Whit! is the result,’ I am
mmlermwrl to (heath on
[hf .rm*r1_1(I/I ufzIc‘L'l(.wI»
lions‘ bruu_(;hr by my
cm>mit*x
"
Thu sulnm
h1u.vlu'rI with rlaatnn
He not only ]l’(lI'(.l()ll(f(l
the I/"ier but gave him
a
fins‘ Si’! z)fr‘l'n[l14'.s' and
imndnl (war In him the
mm who had .s'I(1mim'r:d
iris regzzirairbte. The noble
vizier set Ifwuz }l"t‘1’ and
mnnmmu’ [0 mm: them
wish kirxdzicxsz
IHE §l'n'n E R1:_\E:
THE BOOK U!‘ .~\!<r\m(
Vvl3DU‘v'l AM) (v\:lLl:.
HI)K'H-J,NJil 1'1-,\'mi(v
LAW 9
‘
71
’l'llK ‘5r'§H§K\ Ul’ AM KSIS
\-‘Vhrn Aprzer had been
dcpmred in the way I
have described, /inmrm
mine to the throne. He
Lrelorxgerl to the di.xrm:t
of Sui: and was 41
nativr of the town
called Siuph At first
the lfgypzians wem
inclined to be contemptuour, and did not
think much ofhim
hccuuse of his humble
and lmdirtinguislzed
origin,‘ but later on he
cleverly brought them
to heel. wizhout having
I'(’(:t)urSc‘ so harsh
rrzeaxures.
Amongst his z'zmrmwrable treamrer. he hm! 1!
gold foothath, Whi(‘h he
and his guests used on
m,-:,'a.s‘i()rz to wmh their
feet tn. This hr’ broke
up, and with the material had a status‘ nuzrlze
to one of the gods.
\v}z1ch he then re: up in
what he thought the
most suimble spot in
the cil‘_v. The Egywiarzr
('uIz.9‘lantl}? cmnmg
upon the statue. Irzatm’
it with profototd reverPrice, and as soon as
Amu.s‘t'.s‘ heard offhe
effect (I had upon them,
he Caller! at meeting and
rcvealml the fun that
the deeply rwetrcul
.rmtu,e was 07:01’ a foolbulh. which zlwy
washer! their few and
pixxezl and vamitcd in.
He wmr on to say that
/its own care was much
the sami’, in that once
he had been only an
nnlinury person and
was now their l<:'ng;.vo
tlml jets! as Ihey Izod
come to revere Hm
IftlI1.S'f:)rmZ£§f0€)!b£l(l1,
so {hay hmi boiler pay
72 LAW 9
Interpretation
Michelangelo knew that by changing the shape of the nose he might ruin
the entire sculpture. Yet Soderini was a
patron who prided himself on his
aesthetic judgment. To offend such a man by arguing would not only gain
Michelangelo nothing, it would put future commissions in jeopardy.
Michelangelo was too clever to argue. His solution was to change
Soden‘m"s perspective (literally bringing him closer to the nose) without
making him realize that this was the cause of his misperception.
Fortunately for posterity, Michelangelo found a way to keep the per
faction of the statue intact while at the same time making Soderini believe
he had improved it. Such is the double power of winning through actions
rather than argument: No one is offended, and your point is proven.
KEYS T0 POWER
In the realm of power you must learn to judge your moves by their long»
term effects on other people. The problem in trying to prove a point or
gain a. victory through argument is that in the end you can never be certain
how it affects the people you’re arguing with: They may appear to agree
with you politely, but inside they may resent you. Or perhaps something
you said inadvertently even offended thern—-words have that insidious
ability to be interpreted according to the other person’s mood and insecurities. Even the best argument has no solid foundation, for we have all come
to distrust the slippery nature of words. And days after agreeing with some
one, we ofien revert to our old opinion out of sheer habit.
Understand this: Words are a dime a dozen. Everyone knows that in
the heat of an argument, we will all say anything to support our cause. We
will quote the Bible, refer to unverifiable statistics. Who can be persuaded
by bags of air like that? Action and demonstration are much more powerful and meaningful. They are there, before our eyes, for us to see-——“Yes,
now the statue’s nose does look just right.” There are no offensive words,
no possibility of misinterpretation. No one can argue with a demonstrated
proof. As Baltasar Graciim remarks, “The midi is generally seen, rarely
heard.”
Sir Christopher Wren was England’s version of the Renaissance man.
He had mastered the sciences of mathematics, astronomy, physics, and
physiology. Yet during his extremely long career as England’s most Cele‘
brated architect he was often told by his patrons to make impractical
changes in his designs. Never once did he argue or offend. He had other
ways of proving his point.
In 1688 Wren designed a magnificent town hall for the city of Westminster. The mayor, however. was not satisfied; in fact he was nervous. He
told Wren he was afraid the second {floor was not secure, and that it could
all come crashing down on his office on the first floor. He demanded that
Wren add two stone columns for extra support. Wren, the consummate engineer, knew that these columns would serve no purpose, and that the
mayor’s fears were baseless. But build them he did, and the mayor was
grateful. It was only years later that workmen on a high scaffold saw that
the columns stopped just short of the ceiling.
They were dummies. But both men got what they wanted: The mayor
could relax, and Wren knew posterity would understand that his original
dedgn worked and the columns were unnecessary.
The power of demonstrating your idea is that your opponents do not
get defensive, and are therefore more open to persuasion. Making them literally and physically feel your meaning is infinitely more powerful than are
gument.
A heclder once interrupted Nikita. Khrushchev in the middle of a
speech in which he was denouncing the crimes of Stalin. “You were a colleague of Stalirfs,” the heekler yelled, “why didn’t you stop him then?”
Khrushschev apparently could not see the heckler and barked out, “VVho
said that?” No hand went up. No one moved a muscle. After a few seconds
of tense silence, Khrushchev finally said in a quiet voice, “Now you know
why I didn’t stop him.” Instead of just arguing that anyone facing Stalin
was afraid, knowing that the slightest sign of rebellion would mean certain
death, he had made them feel what it was like to face Stalin———had made
them feel the paranoia, the fear of speaking up, the terror of confronting
the leader, in this case Khrushchev. The demonstration was visceral and no
more argument was necessary.
The most powerful persuasion goes beyond action into symbol. The
power of a symbol——a flag, a mythic story, a monument to some emotional
event--is that everyone understands you without anything being said. In
1975, when Henry Kissinger was engaged in some frusti-ating negotiations
with the Israelis over the return of part of the Sinai desert that they had
seized in the 1967 war, he suddenly broke off a tense meeting and decided
to do some sightseeing. He paid a visit to the ruins of the ancient fortress
of Masada, known to all Israelis as the place where seven hundred Jewish
warriors committed mass suicide in A.I). 73 rather than give in to the
Roman troops besieging them. The Israelis instantly understood the message of Kissingefs visit: He was indirectly accusing them of courting mass
suicide. Although the visit did not by itself change their minds, it made
them think far more seriously than any direct warning would have. Syrn~
bols like this one carry great emotional significance.
When aiming for power, or trying to conserve it, always look for the
indirect route. And also choose your battles carefully. If it does not matter
in the long run whether the other person agrees with you-«or if time and
their own experience will make them understand what you mean——then it
is best not even to bother with a demonstration. Save your energy and
walk away.
honor and respect to
him, too. In rhis way
the Egyptians were
jwrsuatled to accept
him as their master.
ms; HISTORIES,
HERODOTIJS.
FIFTH CENHIRY B13.
GOD .-\\T) A\i§R.i\I|i\,\1
The Mtlxl High God
hurl promised Jim: He
would not take Abraham it soul ltnlexs the
man wanted to (lie and
asked Him to do so.
When A brahum is‘ life
was drawing to a Clare,
and God determined (0
.reL'2,e him. He rem’ an
angel in the guise of a
dccrepiz old man who
was‘ almost entirely
inmpru:im1e(I. The old
man Slapped outside
Ahralzw/1': door and
.m2'clIoIz1'r1z. “Oh Ahrae
(mm, 1 would like
szmierlzzng to ear.
"
A bmlmm was mrzazezl
to hear him say this,
“Die. "
exclaimed Abraham. ‘'1! wtmlzi be
lwtlrtrfnr you than to
go on living in that
condition. "
Almzlmm always kept
food ready at his home
for pzzssing guests. So
he gave Elm old man a
bowl containing [>mIlz
and men; with Iyrwd
cmmbs. The old mun
sat down to em. II1:
swullrm-‘rad [(1})(N'i(II1sly.
with great effort. and
{lll{.‘(€ when he took
sarm? food it dr0p])(‘([
from his Iumri. scattering on the gmrmd. “Uh
Abraham, "
he miiil.
LAW 9 73
“help me In «at.
"
A firm
ham 100/\’ tlua,/‘rmzl in
his hand and lifwd ii to
me 171:! man '5‘ lips. Bu!
ii slid (lawn lzix l'7i’m'd
and over his chesl.
“Winn i.\‘ your age, 010'
man? “
I?$'k(7(l A braizmn.
The old man
rnemumwi 41 number a/'
vmrx sIi;,>/111)‘ grmwr
than Abraham Ix‘ uld
am’. T/mt Ah/uluzm
vxc/ninu=,d.' “()lz I.or1i
Our God, mkr mp mm;
You before I reach this
manis‘ age’ and rink mm
the xcznw cmzdirion as
he is in now.
"
No
warwr had A Imzfmnz
rpokm thrrstr words’
than Gull tank ;7(2.\‘.\'m—
xiurz nf his soul.
‘me xml‘rI..1-, Rmr:
nu: Im<)1<m—'ARMm-
\MS|)()€\i AND mm 1-1.
‘( wk's'H'.M'1! I‘rN'nnI\’
74 LAW 9
Image: The Seesaw. Up and down
and up and down
go the arguers,
getting nowhere
fast. Get off the
seesaw and show
them your mean
ing without kick
ing or pushing.
Leave them at the
top and let gravity
bring them gently
to the ground.
Authority: Never argue. In society nothing must be dis
cussed; give only results. (Benjamin Disraeli, 1804-1881)
REVERSAL
Verbal argument has one vital use in the realm of power: To distract and
cover your tracks when you are practicing deception or are caught in a lie.
In such cases it is to your advantage to argue with all the conviction you
can muster. Draw the other person into an argument to distract them fmm
your deceptive move. When caught in a lie, the more emotional and certain you appear, the less likely it seems that you are lying.
This technique has saved the hide of many a con artist. Once Count
Victor Lustig, swindle: par excellence, had sold dozens of suckers around
the country a phony box with which he claimed to be able to copy money.
Discovering their mistake, the suckers generally chose not to go the police,
rather than risk the embarrassment of publicity. But one Sherifi Richards,
of Rernsen County, Oklahoma, was not the kind of man to accept being
conned out of$10,000, and one morning he tracked Lustig down to a hotel
in Chicago.
Lustig heard a knock on the door. When he opened it he was looking
down the barrel of a gun. “What seems to be the problem?” he calmly
asked. “You son of a bitch,” yelled the sheriff, “I’m going to kill you. You
conned me with that damn box of yours!” Lustig feigned confusion. “You
mean it’s not working?” he asked. “You know it’s not working,” replied the
sheriff. “But that’s impossible,” said Lustig. “There’s no way it couldn’t be
working. Did you operate it properly?” “I did exactly what you told me to
do,” said the sheriff. “No, you must have done something wrong,” said
Lustig. The argument went in circles. The barrel ofthe gun was gently lowcred.
Lustig next went to phase two in the argument tactic: He poured out a
whole bunch of technical gobbledygook about the borfis operation, completely beguiling the sheriff, who now appeared less sure ofhimself and argued less forcefully. “Look,” said Lusfig, “I’ll give you your money back
right now. I’ll also give you written instruclions on how to work the machine and I’ll come out to Oklahoma to make sure it’s working properly.
There’s no way you can lose on that.” The sheriff reluctantly agreed. To
satisfy him totally, Lustig took out a hundred one-hundred—dollar bills and
gave them to him, telling him to relax and have a fun weekend in Chicago.
Calmer and a little confused, the sheriff finally left Over the next few days
Lustig checked the paper every morning. He finally found what he was
looking for: A short arficle reporting Sheriff Richa.rcls’s arrest, trial, and
conviction for passing counterfeit notes. Lustig had won the argument; the
sheriff never bothered him again.
LAWS) ; 7..
LAW
10
INFECTH3N:AVOID7UIE
LHVPLAPPY'A$€D UTQLLHCKH7
}UDGMENT
You can diefrom someone else’s mimy—emotizmal states
are as infections as diseases. I/bu may jiael you me help
ing the drowning man but you are 071532 precipitating
your own disaster The unfortunate sometimes draw misfortune on themselves; they will also draw it on you. Associate with the happy andfmtvmate instead.
TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW
Born in Limerick, Ireland, in 1813, Marie Gilbert came to Paris in the
18405 to make her fortune as a dancer and performer. Taking the name
Lola Montez (her mother was of distant Spanish descent), she claimed to
be a flamenco dancer from Spain. By 1845 her career was languishing, and
to survive she became a courtesa.n—-quicldy one of the more successful in
Paris.
Only one man could salvage Lola’s dancing career: Alexandre Dujaxier, owner of the newspaper with the largest circulation in France, and
also the newspaper’s drama critic. She decided to woo and conquer him.
Investigating his habits, she discovered that he went riding every morning.
An excellent horsewoman herself, she rode out one morning and “acciden~
tally” ran into him. Soon they were riding together every day. A few weeks
later Lola moved into his apartment.
For a while the two were happy together. With Duja.rier’s help, Lola
began to revive her dancing career. Despite the risk to his social standing,
Dujarier told friends he would marry her in the spring. (Lola had never
told him that she had eloped at age nineteen with an Englishman, and was
still legally married.) Although Dujarier was deeply in love, his life started
to slide downhill.
His fortunes in business changed and influential friends began to avoid
him. One night Dujarier was invited to a
party, attended by some of the
wealthiest young men in Paris. Lola wanted to go too but he would not
allow it. They had their first quarrel, and Dujarier attended the party by
himself. There, hopelessly drunk, be insulted an influential drama critic,
jean-Baptiste Rosemond de Beauvallon, perhaps because of something the
critic had said about Lola. The following morning Beauvallon challenged
him to a duel. Beauvallon was one of the best pistol shots in France. Dujarier tried to apologize, but the duel took place, and he was shot and
killed. Thus ended the life of one of the most promising young men of
Paris society. Devastated, Lola left Paris.
In 1846 Lola. Montez found herself in Munich, where she decided to
woo and conquer King Ludwig of Bavaria. The best way to Ludwig, she
discovered, was through his aide-de-camp, Count Otto Von Rechberg, a
man with a fondness for pretty girls. One day when the count was breakfastirig at an outdoor cafe, Lola rode by on her horse, was “accidentally”
thrown from the saddle, and landed at Rechberg’s feet. The count rushed
to help her and was enchanted. He promised to introduce her to Ludwig.
Rechberg arranged an audience with the king for Lola, but when she
arrived in the anteroom, she could hear the king saying he was too busy to
meet a
favorseeking stranger. Lola pushed aside the sentries and entered
his room anyway. In the process, the front of her dress somehow got torn
(perhaps by her, perhaps by one of the sentries), and to the astonishment of
all, most especially the king, her bare breasts were brazenly exposed. Lola
was granted her audience with Ludwig. Fifty—five hours later she made her
debut on the Bavarian stage; the reviews were terrible, but that did not stop
Ludwig from arranging more performances.
'lllI. \l 'l .‘\\l) ‘IIIl-,
iI.\\\l’\\ll l:
A I1utf<mmlilr«'If
azrriczl by (I (‘row In the
top ofu tall ('41H1[)tlIlll(’,
and byfrzl/mg Into a
crevice sum evdrd in
escaping Its drvad fall’.
It then lmrnilglzi the
wall to .shelter‘ it. by
appealing in it by the
grace of (lad, and
/7f(ll.i'lI2g1I.t height. aml
the l)€t,ll4!_\;' um! noble
lune ofirr bells. “/ilai,"
it went on, “us llmw
not hem able to drop
lnvieatli the green
lmznchcs of my old
Father and to lie in the
fallow earth cnve'r'('d by
hit fallen lt’tll7£’,.S, ([0
you. at least, not abm1—
Jon mrr. When I
found
mysr>Ifln the hunk of
the cruel (row I made 41
wow. rim! 1} l
l:‘S(‘d]}L’(l I
would end my life in :2
little hole. "
A! there wzrrzls, the
wall, movwl Wllh
tomprlrsirm, was
rwztcnl to rlmlrrr the
nut in the spot wluzre it
had fallm. Within (1
slmn time, Ill? nut burst
open: 11.3‘ mom :'c'a(:Izc.rl
In between the new .
of the .xl(me.\' and began
1:) push them apart; its
ShU0{.\‘ p}‘€.S’.\‘t’(l up
lowurd the .$I\ y. 'l'lIt’_\-‘
won rose above the
hit/[I/l‘.II‘£,’, and as the
Iwiiiml rows grrw
rhirkrr they began to
thrust the walls apart
and force the ancient
.s'tmn7.r from their 0111
gzlaaar. Tlzcoz lltr’ will,
too late and in vain.
l)(!W{lll(’Ll (/14: rzzurc of
[Ar (l£’.$'I)'HL'll(IIl, and in
short lime it fell in min.
LEONARDO DA Vim l.
145} lSl9
LAW 10 T7
In luv mm limo Smmn
Yllrrirlultr wax u grim
1/0110!‘ I rwtmnb¢-:- that
I
Izupjrz-:ze>11 Io may: 1211!:
one day at I/1:’ 12mm’ of
1! rich Mu’ (‘()I7)‘l4II![Ili!’(’{
Ilv told his /mriynz
when cIi.»<'u.r.mu,v wuvs
to cure him that am»
mi-um mu‘ m jlrnvi/Ir’
m’<'u.\iml.\' for me to
eujnv /on mmpmzy.' He
could then fix‘ his cgvrw
(:1: tin! fr4*.vi1:1<*.s'.r afmy
rmnaimlatlcv and his
Iliutiglm. on me over-
,/iuwing <‘lm*rf'uIIut\:r
rmzi vi},/or o_/"my ymtrxg
man/marl: layfilling all
his‘ .m:.s'm' with the
flower nfm ymuh his
m/ulilion might
im/)rm>42 lI('_!i>rgu1 In
add that I7liIE(' znighi
gt‘! lV(}YS€.
Mu,\1'.\;r.:~u«:.
1533 1392
Mmzy rhin;,:.s are said If)
he injk‘L'!lrm.s', .S/m’pim’S.\‘ can he m(};'¢tt'm4.s.
mu! yawning us‘ well. In
Ilzrjqe-xru/c untrvgy.
when tin: mmny ix
agfluiml mu! .\‘}mws an
im'IimIIim1 I0 rmli, (In
no) miml in 1.114‘ l'('fl)'(.
MtIl<(' a slum‘ of
cumplolt’ w1hnru3.r.s‘, and
my enemy wil/ be mkm
by mm and will I?('('I7Int’
mlu.w¢l. You iIlfl't.'1 than
spirit. You nut infer‘!
mm: with H cr:mfrz'r'.
rIr£(I1/~‘./ikt‘.\[3ir('I. with
Imwzlrxm, or (‘W311
Iwukrw.s:r.
:\ il()l)K oi l~1\'l?R)Vi}>.
l‘<’liY‘\\«1¢)'l'(l Mi sum.
xv H-,\lI.Iv.’\r'lIt 4') «mm:
78 LAW 10
Ludwig was, in his own words, “bewitched” by Lola. He started
to appear in public with her on his arm, and then he bought and furnished
an apartment for her on one of Munich’s most fashionable boulevards. Al»
though he had been known as a miser, and was not given to flights of
fancy, he started to shower Lola with and to write poetry for her. Now
his favored mistress, she catapulted to fame and fortune overnight.
Lola began to lose her sense of proportion. One day when she was out
riding, an elderly man rode ahead of her, a bit too slowly for her liking.
Unable to pass him, she began to slash him with her riding crop. On another occasion she took her dog, unleashed, out for a stroll. The dog at»
tacked a passerby, but instead of helping the men get the dog away, she
whipped him with the leash. Incidents like this infuriated the stolid citizens
of Bavaria, but Ludwig stood by Lola and even had her naturalized as a
Bavarian citizen. The kings entourage tried to wake him to the dangers of
the affair, but those who criticized Lola were summarily fired.
While Bavarians who had loved their king now outwardly disre—
spected him, Lola was made a countess, had a new palace built for herself,
and began to dabble in politics, advising Ludwig on policy. She was the
most powerful force in the kingdom. Her influence in the king’s cabinet
continued to grow, and she treated the other ministers with disdain. As a
result, riots broke out throughout the realm. A once peaceful land was vir~
rually in the grip of civil war, and students everywhere were chanting,
“Raus mit Lola!”
By February of 1848, Ludwig was finally unable to withstand the pressure. With great sadness he ordered Lola. to leave Bavaria immediately.
She left, but not until she was paid off. For the next five weeks the Bevan‘-
ans’ wrath was turned against their formerly beloved king. In March of that
year he was forced to abdicate.
Lola Montez moved to England. More than anything she needed respectability, and despite being married (she still had not arranged a divorce
from the Englishman she had wed years before), she set her sights on
George Trafford Heald, a promising young army olficer who was the son of
an influential hamster. Although he was ten years younger than Lola, and
could have chosen a wife among the prettiest and wealthiest young girls of
English society, Heald fell under her spell. They were married in 1849.
Soon arrested on the charge of bigamy, she skipped bail, and she and
Heald made their way to Spain. They quarreled horribly and on one occasion Lola slashed him with a. knife. Finally, she drove him away. Returning
to England, he found he had lost his position in the army. Ostracized from
English society, he moved to Portugal, where he lived in poverty. After a
few months his short life ended in a boating accident.
A few years later the man who published Lola Montez’s autobiography went bankrupt
In 1853 Lola moved to California, where she met and married a man
named Pat Hull. Their relationship was as stormy as all the others, and she
left Hull for another man. He took to drink and fell into a deep depression
that lasted until he died, four years later, still a
relatively young man.
At the age of forty—one, Lola gave away her clothes and finery and
turned to God. She toured America, lecturing on religious topics, dressed
in white and wearing a halolike white headgear. She died two years later, in
1861.
Interpretation
Lola Montez attracted men with her wiles, but her power over them went
beyond the sexual. It was through the force of her character that she kept
her lovers enthralled. Men were sucked into the maelstrom she churned up
around her. They felt confused, upset, but the strength of the emotions she
stirred also made them feel more alive.
As is often the case with infection, the problems would only arise over
time. Lola’s inherent instability would begin to get under her lovers’ skin.
They would find themselves drawn into her problems, but their emotional
attachment to her would make them want to help her. This was the crucial
point of the clisease--for Lola Montez could not be helped. Her problems
were too deep. Once the lover identified with them, he was lost. He would
find himself embroiled in quarrels. The infection would spread to his family and friends, or, in the case ofLudwig, to an entire nation. The only so
lution would be to cut her off, or suller an eventual collapse.
The infecting-character type is not restricted to women; it has nothing
to do with gender. It stems from an inward instability that radiates outward,
drawing disaster upon itself. There is almost a desire to destroy and unset
tle. You could spend a lifetime studying the pathology of infecting characters, but don’t waste your time—just learn the lesson. When you suspect
you are in the presence of an infector, don’t argue, don’t try to help, don’t
pass the person on to your friends, or you will become enmeshed. Flee the
ix1fector’s presence or suffer the consequences.
Yami Cassius has a lean and hungry look. He thinks too much. . . .
I do not know the man I should avoid so soon as that spare Cassius, . . r
Such men as he he never at heart is ease while: they behold a greater
than themselves, and therefore are they very dangmusv
Julius Caesar. William .5’/mlms/Morn, I564-I616
KEYS TO POWER
Those misfortunates among us who have been brought down by circumstances beyond their control deserve all the help and sympathy we can
give them. But there are others who are not born to misfortune or unhappi~
ness, but who draw it upon themselves by their destructive actions and unsettling effect on others. Itwould be a great thing if we could raise them up,
change their patterns, but more often than not it is their patterns that end
up getting inside and changing us. The reason is siinple-humans are extremely susceptible to the moods, emotions, and even the ways of thinking
of those with whom they spend their time.
The incurably unhappy and unstable have a particularly strong infect»
Regard nofr:<;(i.xl1 man
as ('n!tun»'ri, ilzusrgh you
may raiam n glfin/I
man as wi.s'e;rJm1
(,‘.S'lt‘{,’IIl no ignorant
abA'Iuint'r a /my anrelirr.
Do not rmzsorr with
fools. on/mcially those
who m/zsidorlII(,II11~
rclw-s wixu. And be not
s'e1_f-xaIi.sfi('(t with your
own igrmmrzce. L6!
vnur llI7é‘rt‘l)IlV.VL’ In‘
only with men ofguod
nt/11t!e:f0r it In by such
tI.\'.\‘0(‘IIl[l()Vl that nwn
themselves‘ atmm to
goon’ rzymzc. Du you
not observe how
wsarne-oil it rm'rrg£e(l
wirlr ru.a'c.r or r‘E0lc‘f.\'
and how. when it has
been for .t‘()I)I£' little in
associarimr with msm‘
or rztslrrrs, it Cfflllif? to
{If sesame-oi} (am! is
called ail r;gfrm‘z'.r or oil
of w'r1i'e1.v?
A MIRRUR FOR Hum r-:8,
KAI l(A'Hs hm
lSK/‘\NDAR.
r~.r.i-vrwrn (‘l,N'l um
LAW 10 79
50 LAW 10
mg power because their characters and emotions are so intense. They often
present themselves as victims, making it difficult, at first, to see their miseries as self-inflicted. Before you realize the real nature of their problems
you have been infected by them.
Understand this: In the game of power, the people you associate with
are critical. The risk of associating with infeclors is that you will waste valu
able time and energy trying to free yourself. Through a kind ofguilt by association, you will also suffer in the eyes ofothers. Never underestimate the
dangers of infection.
There are many kinds of infector to be aware of, but one of the most
insidious is the sufferer from chronic dissatisfaction. Cassius, the Roman
conspirator against Julius Caesar, had the discontent that comes from deep
envy. He simply could not endure the presence of anyone of greater talent.
Probably because Caesar sensed the man’s interminable soumess, he
passed him up for the position of first praetorship, and gave the position to
Brutus instead. Cassius brooded and broorled, his hatred for Caesar be
coming pathological. Brutus himself, a. devoted republican, disliked Caesar’s dictatorship; had he had the patience to wait, he would have become
the first man in Rome after Ca.esar‘s death, and could have undone the evil
that the leader had wrought. But Cassius infected him with his own rancor,
bending his ear daily with tales of Caesafs evil. He finally won Brutus over
to the conspiracy. It was the beginning of a great tragedy. How many misfortunes could have been avoided had Brutus learned to fear the power of
infection.
There is only one solution to infection: quarantine. But by the time
you recognize the problem it is often too late. A Lola Montez oveiwhelms
you with her forceful personality. Cassius intrigues you with his confiding
nature and the depth of his feelings. How can you protect yourself against
such insidious viruses? The answer lies in judging people on the effects
they have on the world and not on the reasons they give for their probImage: A Virus. Unseen, it
lems. Infectors can be recognized by the misfortune they draw on thementers your pores without
selves, their turbulent past, their long line of broken ‘relationships, their un«
warning, spreading silently and
stable careers, and the very force of their character, which sweeps you up
slowly. Before you are aware of
and makes you lose your reason. Be forewarned by these signs of an infecthe infection, it is deep inside you.
tor; learn to see the discontent in their eye. Most important of all, do not
take pity. Do not enmesh yourself in trying to help. The infector will re
main unchanged, but you will be unhinged.
The other side of infection is equally valid, and perhaps more readily
understood: There are people who attract happiness to themselves by their
good cheer, natural buoyancy, and intelligence. They are a source of plea:
sure, and you must associate with them to share in the prospeiity they draw
upon themselves.
This applies to more than good cheer and success: All positive quali~
ties can infect us. Talley:-and had many strange and intimidating traits, but
most agreed that he surpassed all Frenchmen in gmciousness, aristocratic
charm, and wit. Indeed he came from one of the oldest noble families in
the country, and despite his belief in democracy and the French Republic,
he retained his courtly manners. His contemporary Napoleon was in many
ways the opposite~—~a peasant from Corsica, tacitum and ungracious, even
violent.
There was no one Napoleon admired more than Talleyrand. He envied his minister’s way with people, his wit and his ability to charm
women, and as best he could, he kept Talleyrand around him, hoping to
soak up the culture he lacked. There is no doubt that Napoleon changed as
his rule continued. Many of the rough edges were smoothed by his constant association with Talleyrand. .
Use the positive side of this emotional osmosis to advantage. If, for example, you are miserly by nature, you will never go beyond a certain limit;
only generous souls attain greatness. Associate with the generous, then,
and they will infect you, opening up everything that is tight and restricted
in you. Ifyou are gloomy, gravitate to the cheerful. Ifyou are prone to iso
lation, force yourselfto befriend the gregarious. Never associate with those
who share your defects——~they will reinforce everything that holds you
back. Only create associations with positive aflinities. Make this a rule of
life and you will benefit more than from all the therapy in the world.
Authority: Recognize the fortu~
nate so that you may choose
their company, and the 1mfortu—
nate so that you may avoid
them. Misfortune is usually the
crime of folly, and among those
who suffer from it there is no
malady more contagious: Never
open your door to the least of
misfortunes, for, if you do, many
others will follow in its train. . . .
Do not die of another’s misery.
{Baltasar Grecian, 1601-1658)
REVERSAL
This law admits of no reversal. Its application is universal. There is nothing
to be gained by associating with those who infect you with their misery;
there is only power and good fortune to be obtained by associating with
the fortunate. Ignore this law at your peril.
LAW 10 :81
LAW
11
LEARN TO KEEP PEOPLE
DEPENDENT ON YOU
_]U DGMI:‘.NT
To maintain your independence you must always be
needed and wanted. The more you are relied on, the more
fieedom you have. Make people depend on you for their
happiness and jimspenly and you have nothing tofear.
Never teach them enough so that they can do without yau.
TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW
Sometime in the Middle Ages, a mercenary soldier (a condottiere), whose
name has not been recorded, saved the town of Siena from a
foreign ag~
gressor. How could the good citizens of Siena reward him? No amount of
money or honor could possibly compare in value to the preservation of a
city’s liberty. The citizens thought of making the mercenary the lord of the
city, but even that, they decided, wasn’t recompense enough. At last one of
them stood before the assembly called to debate this matter and said, “Let
us kill him and then worship him as our patron saint.” And so they did.
The Count of Carmagnola was one of the bravest and most successful
ofall the condottieri. In 1442, late in his life, he was in the employ of the city
of Venice, which was in the midst of a
long war with Florence. The count
was suddenly recalled to Venice. A favorite of the people, he was received
there with all kinds of honor and splendor. That evening he was to dine
with the doge himself, in the doge’s palace. On the way into the palace,
however, he noticed that the guard was leading him in a different direction
from usual. Crossing the famous Bridge of Sighs, he suddenly realized
where they were taking him—to the dungeon. He was convicted on a
trurnped~up charge and the next day in the Piazza San Marco, before a
horrified crowd who could not understand how his fate had changed s
drastically, he was beheaded. '
interpretation
Many of the great tomlottieri of Renaissance Italy suffered the same fate as
the patron saint of Siena and the Count of Carrnagnolaz They won battle
after battle for their employers only to find themselves banished, imprisoned, or executed. The problem was not ingratitude; it was that there were
so many other candottieri as able and valiant as they were. They were replaceable. Nothing was lost by killing them. Meanwhile, the older among
them had grown powerful themselves, and wanted more and more money
for their services. How much better, then, to do away with them and hire a
younger, cheaper mercenary. That was the fate of the Count of Carmagnola, who had started to act impudently and independently. He had taken
his power for granted without making sure that he was truly indispensable.
Such is the fate (to a less violent degree, one hopes) of those who do
not make others dependent on them. Sooner or later someone comes along
who can do the job as well as they can-—someone younger, fresher, less expensive, less threatening.
Be the only one who can do what you do, and make the fate ofthose who
hire you so entwined with yours that they cannot possibly get rid of you.
Otherwise you will someday be forced to cross your own Bridge of Sighs.
()BSliRVANCF. O F THE LAVV
When Otto von Bismarck became a deputy in the Prussian parliament in
1847, he was thirty~two years old and without an ally or friend. Looking
llH‘l“t?IHiR>i<
Two Imrw.» were rurr} —
[rig two /omlx. The /‘rum
Ham’ mm! we'll, /ml
I/15‘ rear Iinrvu wm
lazy. The’ mm lwgun In
pi/t‘ Ilw rmr Ilnrwlx
load on Ilzrglrnm
Hm’,\‘<*: W/Mn (hvv /(ml
rI'arn‘fl*rt‘<*(/ ll 4/”, INF
rmr Iio1'sr>_/mzmt 1'!
MW going, and hr mu!
to the [rum I[nr\r':
“'l})1lum1 xwmm’ Tin’
PTIUIY’ V0!’ /7_\", I/I(' NH‘I‘(’
you lmw to .\I1t?2'1:“
W/Imz they 1’L’(l(‘/IF!’ /In‘
m\‘z1r/1. mo owwr xnirl.
"Wiw .\/um/:/ I Iuzldm
Iwn /)Ul'.\(’.\ w/mu I
(‘ll/‘IV u/I rm (my? I /md
harm‘ gin’ I/l(‘ um’ all
Ilwfmul zr wuun‘, uml
rm rlw r/zmul nil/u»
mixer; :11 [um I xlmll
haw I/If’ }1irlr."Am/ so
/24’ III(/
1 Ami x.
Li«¢>Tmsmy.
l32X—l9lU
LAW 1 1 ‘Z?
ilil t.~Vl' IHM \M\l.l\'l",l)
RX lll\l\l.|.l~'
Then the Woman
llmglwrl and set the (m
a bowl ofllle wurm
wlure rmlk um] saizl, “0
Cut. you am as clever
at a man. but remember that your lmrguin
was amt Imulr with me
film: or the’ Dog. and 1'
(lo Mm‘ know wins! they
will do when they wine
harm:
"
“Wl2aI i.\ that to
rrwI"'.\'uirl my Car. “lfl
haw my plmw in {he
(‘ave by t/In’/ire and my
warm wlzilv milk three
mmax 11 day, I do not
mm what the Man or
the Dog can do."
. , ./Ilml /rum that day
to tl1l.\, liersr Bzelmal.
threw proper Mm out
uffivc will always
throw I/aingx m a Cu:
wlwnevw Ilwy nine!
lam. and all proper
l)og.r will (‘ham him up
a tree, But the Cu:
kvepx lulv .u'<l¢> of my
bargain mu, I/0 will kill
mire, and he will be
Irina’ to Ilulrlm when he
it in the lmu.<,1’. fast as
lung nx (Hwy do not pull
liix (ail too hard. Bu!
Wl1(’Il he has done that.
am! hetmrm times. and
when the mmm gets up
1121.’! me ntglll mm:-.9, lzre
l.\‘ the (‘In Ihm walk: by
iz£7n.s'£'lfi am! all p!ru'e.y
are alike to him, Tlzm
he goes" out I!) the Wet
Wild W’m1r1.s‘ or up the
Wcl Wild 'I‘n'es or on
the Wet Wild Roofs,
wuvira,i' luix wild mil
rmrl walking by his
will! (one.
ms; so Monies.
RL'l}\‘v\RD KIPLINU,
l86S— l 936
54 LAW 11
around him, he decided that the side to ally himself with was not the par
liament’s liberals or conservatives, not any particular minister, and certainly not the people. It was with the king, Frederick William IV. This was
an odd choice to say the least, for Frederick was at a low point ofhis power.
A weak, indecisive man, he consistently gave in to the liberals in pa1:lia~
merit; in fact he was spineless, and stood for much that Bismarck disliked,
personally and politically. Yet Bismarck courted Frederick night and day.
When other deputies attacked the king for his many inept moves, only Bismarck stood by him.
Finally, it all paid off: In 1851 Bismarck was made a minister in the
king’s cabinet. Now he went to work. Time and again he forced the king’s
hand, getting him to build up the military, to stand up to the liberals, to do
exactly as Bismarck wished. He worked on Frederick’s insecurity about his
manliness, challenging him to be firm and to rule with pride. And he
slowly restored the king’s powers until the monarchy was once again the
most powerful force in Prussia.
When Frederick died, in 1861, his brother William assumed the
throne. William disliked Bismarck intensely and had no intention of keep
ing him around. But he also inherited the same situation his brother had:
enemies galore, who wanted to nibble his power away. He actually considered abdicating, feeling he lacked the strength to deal with this dangerous
and precarious position. But Bismarck insinuated himself once again. He
stood by the new king, gave him strength, and urged him into firm and de
cisive action. The king grew dependent on Bismarck’s strong-arm tactics to
keep his enemies at bay, and despite his antipathy toward the man, he soon
made him his prime minister. The two quarreled often over policy———
Bismarck was much more conservative——but the king understood his own
dependency. Whenever the prime minister threatened to resign, the king
gave in to him, time after time. It was in fact Bismarck who set state policy.
Years later, Bismarck’s actions as Pn1ssia’s prime minister led the vari
ous German states to be united into one country. Now Bismarck finagled
the king into letting himself be crowned emperor of Germany. Yet it was
really Bismarck who had reached the heights of power. As rigl1t—hand man
to the emperor, and as imperial chancellor zmd knighted prince, he pulled
all the levers.
lnterpretalion
Most young and ambitious politicians looking out on the political landscape
of 18405 Germany would have tried to build a
power base among those
with the most power. Bismarck saw different. Joining forces with the powerful can be foolish: They will swallow you up, just as the (loge of Venice
swallowed up the Count of Carmagnola. No one will come to depend on
you if they are already strong. If you are ambitious, it is much wiser to seek
out weak rulers or masters with whom you can create a
relationship of do
pendency. You become their strength, their intelligence, their spine. What
power you hold! If they got rid of you the whole edifice would collapse.
Necessity rules the world. People rarely act unless compelled to. If you
create no need for yourself, then you will be done away with at first opportunity. If, on the other hand, you understand the Laws of Power and make
others depend on you for their welfare, if you can counteract their weak»
ness with your own “iron and blood,” in Bisrn-arck’s phrase, then you will
survive your masters as Bismarck did, You will have all the benefits of
power without the thorns that come from being a master.
Thus a wise prince will think ofways to keep his citizens ofevery sort
and under every circumstance dependent on the state and on him;
and than they will always be trustworthy.
Nitculé ll/l(tt'hi(tzIellz'., 1 469-152 7
KEYS TO POWER
The ultimate power is the power to get people to do as you wish. When you
can do this without having to force people or hurt them, when they will»
ingly grant you what you desire, then your power is untouchable. The best
way to achieve this position is to create a. relationship of dependence. The
master requires your services; he is weak, or unable to function without
you; you have enmeshed yourself in his work so deeply that doing away
with you would bring him great difficulty, or at least would mean valuable
time lost in training another to replace you. Once such a
relationship is established you have the upper hand, the leverage to make the master do as
you wish. It is the classic case of the man behind the throne, the servant of
the king who actually controls the king. Bismarck did not have to bully either Frederick or William into doing his bidding. He simply made it clear
that unless he got what he wanted he would walk away, leaving the king to
twist in the wind. Both kings soon danced to Bismarck’s tune.
Do not be one of the many who mistakenly believe that the ultimate
form of power is independence. Power involves a
relationship between
people; you will always need others as allies, pawns, or even as weak mas
ters who serve as your front. The completely independent man would live
in a cabin in the woods«—~he would have the freedom to come and go as he
pleased, but he would have no power. The best you can hope for is that
others will grow so dependent on you that you enjoy a kind of reverse independence: Their need for you frees you.
Louis XI (1423-1483), the great Spider King of France, had a weakness for astrology. He kept a court astrologer whom he admired, until one
day the man predicted that a
lady of the court would die within eight days.
When the prophecy came true, Louis was terrified, thinking that either the
man had murdered the woman to prove his accuracy or that he was so
versed in his science that his powers threatened Louis himself. In either
case he had to be killed.
One evening Louis summoned the astrologer to his room, high in the
castle. Before the man arrived, the king told his servants that when he gave
HI). I-.!.’\| I'|tl.|. \\l)
Illll. \l\li
/tn exzmvugar1/ _vozm,r,v
Vine, vainly uIr1In1inu.»'
of irztlepvnttmrt 0. and
font! ofmmblmg 4:!
large, rtr.\pi.xe<l the
uflizmce Ufa slate/Iv elm
that grew mrar, and
courier) iwr cmbrtzzcsu.
Having rixcn to wme
small height without
any kind oj'.mppnrt.
she shot forth /n,-v~
,'lim.ry hranrhr-.\‘ to u
very rmcomnum and
supw-/izmzis lmglli:
cullilig on her m'igI1~
hour to take notice’ how
(rule site wtmtmi his
a.v.ri.vmm:e. "Poor [IljllInatni rhrub.
"
n';7.‘i(*rl
the «rim. "how inconsisram‘ is thy mmlud.’
lV(:uIrl.s'I (hm! In‘ truly
iudepeudmr, thou
.rlmuz'r!.\'t mn>fuIl_v
apply those /nicer to
the e>nlurg<'nImt uflhy
stem. which [hon
lavislzrvr in vain upon
i(IHlt‘L‘€.3‘StH‘)' _f'r)/iz1g4.'. I
shortly shut! /.tt’hU/LI
thee gruvelling on the
gmmm‘; ye! co1mtu«
mmceti, indvvrl, by
many of the lmmtm
race, who, itztctxicalxfd
will! twziry. haw:
de.vpi.s‘ctl cmnrmly; and
who. 10 support for u
mo.-nent their empty
boast ofin(l(r[wmImm’.
have cxlmumri the
very mzmrr» oftt in f'rii'~
olous exp:-nses.
"
l‘AI'tl.FS.
Rmarur Dom! s V1,
1703-1764
LAW 11 85
86 LAW 1 l
the signal they were to pick the astrologer up, carry him to the window,
and hurl him to the ground, hundreds of feet below.
The astrologer soon arrived, but before giving the signal, Louis decided to ask him one last question: “You claim to understand astrology and
to know the fate of others, so tell me what your fate will be and how long
you have to live.”
“I shall die just three days before Your Majesty," the astrologer replied.
The kings signal was never given. The man’s life was spared. The Spider
King not only protected his astrologer for as long as he was alive, he lavished him with gifts and had him tended by the finest court doctors.
The astrologer survived Louis by several years, disproving his power
ofprophecy but proving his mastery of power.
This is the model: Make others dependent on you. To get rid of you
might spell disaster, even death, and your master dares not tempt fate by
finding out. There are many ways to obtain such a position. Foremost
among them is to possess a talent and creative skill that simply cannot be
replaced.
During the Renaissance, the major obstacle to a pajntefls success was
finding the right patron. Michelangelo did this better than anyone else: His
patron was Pope julius H. But he and the pope quarreled over the building
of the pope’s marble ‘comb, and Michelangelo left Rome in disgust To the
amazement of those in the pope’s circle, not only did the pope not fire him,
he sought him out and in his own haughty way begged the artist to stay.
Michelangelo, he knew, could find another patron, but he could never find
another Michelangelo.
You do not have to have the talent of 3. Michelangelo; you do have to
have a skill that sets you apart from the crowd. You should create a situation in which you can always latch on to another master or patron but your
master cannot easily find another servant with your particular talent. And
if, in reality, you are not actually indispensable, you must find a way to
make it look as ifyou are. Having the appearance ofspecialized knowledge
and skill gives you leeway in your ability to deceive those above you into
thinking they cannot do without you. Real dependence on your master’s
part, however, leaves him more vulnerable to you than the faked variety,
and it is always within your power to make your skill indispensable.
This is what is meant by the intertwining of fates: Like creeping ivy,
you have wrapped yourself around the source of power, so that it would
cause great trauma to cut you away. And you do not necessarily have to entwine yourself around the master; another person will do, as long as he or
she too is indispensable in the chain.
One day Harry Colin, president of Columbia Pictures, was visited in
his office by a gloomy group of his executives. It was 1951, when the witchhunc against Communists in Hollywood, carried on by the US. Congress’s
House Un-American Activities Committee, was at its height. The executives had bad news: One of their employees, the screenwriterjolm Howard
Lawson, had been singled out as a Communist. They had to get rid of him
night away or suffer the wrath of the committee.
Harry Cohn was no bleeding—heart liberal; in fact, he had always been
a diehard Republican.
His favorite politician was Benito Mussolini, whom he had once visited, and whose framed photo hung on his wall. If there was someone he
hated Cohn would call him a “Communist bastard.” But to the executives’
amazement Cohn told them he would not fire Lawson. He did not keep the
screenwriter on because he was a good Writer—there were many good
writers in Hollywood. He kept him because of a chain of dependence:
Lawson was Humphrey Bogart’s writer and Bogart was Columbia’s star. If
Cohn messed with Lawson he would ruin an immensely profitable relationship. That was worth more than the terrible publicity brought to him
by his defiance of the committee.
Henry Kissinger managed to survive the many bloodlettings that went
on in the Nixon White House not because he was the best diplomat Nixon
could find—there were other fine negotiators»--and not because the two
men got along so well: They did not. Nor did they share their beliefs and
politics. Kissinger survived because he entrenched himself in so many
areas of the political structure that to do away with him would lead to
chaos. Michelangelds power was intensive, depending on one skill, his ability as an artist; Kissinger’s was extensive. He got himself involved in so
many aspects and departments of the administration that his involvement
became a card in his hand. It also made him many allies. If you can
arrange such a position for yourself, getting rid of you becomes
dangerous—all sorts of interdependencies will unravel. Still, the intensive
form of power provides more freedom than the extensive, because those
who have it depend on no particular master, or particular position of
power, for their security.
To make others dependent on you, one route to take is the secretintelligence tactic. By knowing other people’s secrets, by holding information that they wouldn’t want broadcast, you seal your fate with theirs. You
are untouchable. Ministers of secret police have held this position through»
out the ages: They can make or break a king, or, as in the case of Edgar
Hoover, a president. But the role is so full of insecurities and paranoia that
the power it provides almost cancels itself out. You cannot rest at ease, and
what good is power if it brings you no peace?
One last warning: Do not imagine that your master’s dependence on
you will make him love you. In fact, he may resent and fear you. But, as
Machiavelli said, it is better to be feared than loved. Fear you can control;
love, never. Depending on an emotion as subtle and changeable as love or
friendship will only make you insecure. Better to have others depend on
you out of fear of the consequences of losing you than out of love of your
company.
LAW II 187
885
Image: Vines with Many Thorns. Below, the roots grow deep
and wide. Above, the vines push through bushes, entwine themselves
LAW 11
around trees and poles and window ledges. To get rid of them
would cost such toil and blood, it is easier to let them climb.
Authority: Make people depend on
you. More is to be gained from -
such dependence than courtesy. He
who has slaked his thirst, immediately turns his back on the well,
no longer needing it. When depen~
dence disappears, so does civifity
and decency, and then respect.
The first lesson which experience
should teach you is to keep hope
alive but never satisfied, keeping
even a
royal patron ever in need of
you. (Baltasar Gracién, 16014658)
REVERSAL
The weakness of making others depend on you is that you are in some
measure dependent on them. But trying to move beyond that point means
getting rid of those above you—it means standing alone, depending on no
one. Such is the monopolistic drive of a_]. P. Morgan or ajohn D. Rockefeller———to drive out all competition, to be in complete control. If you can
corner the market, so much the better.
No such independence comes without a price. You are forced to isolate
yourself. Monopolies often turn inward and destroy themselves from the internal pressure. They also stir up powerful resentment, making their enemies bond together to fight them. The drive for complete control is often
ruinous and fruitless. Interdependence remains the law, independence a
rare and often fatal exception. Better to place yourself in a. position of mutual dependence, then, and to follow this critical law rather than look for its
reversal. You will not have the unbearable pressure ofbeing on top, and the
master above you will in essence be your slave, for kewill depend on you.
12
USE SELECTIVE HONESTY
AND GENEROSITY TO
DISARM YOUR VICTIM
JUDGMENT
One sincere and honest move will cover over dozens of
dishonest ones, Open-hearted gestures of honesty and
generosity bring down the guard 97” even tke most suspicious people. Once your selective honesty ojaens a hole in
ikeir mmm; you can deceive and manipulate them at
will. A timely g~zfi——-a Wojan ho1:se——zm'll serve the same
purpose.
189
HI \\«.I-.54 H xnmu
Ull IHH-.li (2|l\ll|,\|,\\
['hlI1C‘(’.Y1‘0 (ii1m'p])<'
Barri of Milan, wi1o.~;e
drum in M95 fill! /mt
willziu 1/w s’z'vmm’ntI1
((‘ILlllV_\«’ . . . W115‘ a fort’-
rumzer nftllul \'[7£'tIl£l/
1_ypv n/Uturlarumual
II(lH’I§{(U(’I'. my (‘ourriw or "mvuiir-r"
im/mxmr. . . . llis real
puriml 0/ izlurv In-gut:
c1j'Ie.rInr mover! in
AnI.m»rrium, l'I'wr€ hr
lM.l‘Ul'l1¢'(I (hr min 0/
Medico Univcrsale,
ntainrtium-'<I 41 ;:v('uI
reimw, and draw’
almn1 in u mm-I: wiz/z
six lmr.\'e.u , . . l’:rr;'eieI.v
.\‘In'mm’:I (0 him. and
mnw invali(l.\‘ /mil
I/’2t’I?l.\‘(‘[1’Af.\ mrrivri in
.\‘t'dllIl c'fmiI'.\‘ 1//I film wit)’
/lmm Purix In his ])/Ht‘!
in Ams/vnlum. Burn
rank no /lctyvtnml for
his cun.\'uIluI[m1.x: Ho
rim:-i/um-d _z:rvm xmm
among rile /mar zmzl
was ncwr krmwrl lo
rmrvrw any 121112142‘)-
zlu-oug/: Ill1‘]:(L\'I 1/I’
hills of c.t'cfmI:grr. /3: 11¢’
c (m(lI'H((,‘([ to live wirlz
s‘m'I1.splcIulru'. m'n,'rilwlccszr, 21 was [H‘l’\‘!:I72(’1’
rim! ht’ pa. ml lhs‘
p/u'lu.m/Jlwrr ,\trm(é.
Mir/rlwily I/ILV‘ /suiwjlic»
Im rlimpjwtlrml frmn
Am,m'r¢1un1, Then 1'!
was (lI\'::ov<,'r'mI that In’
11.41:! lmicwi witir lam:
mmwy and rlimnolzrlx
(hm /mt! [mew plurcul
in /11’: r'I1m'gv.
-in» w)w1«R<n
rm ¢‘HAR1.v\\,\7\.
(Fm-Ln. or FR/\!~«(‘I W0,
W3‘)
90
0
LAW12
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
Sometime in 1926, a
tall, dapperly dressed man paid a visit to Al Capone,
the most feared gangster of his time. Speaking with an elegant Continental
accent, the man introduced himself as Count Victor Lustig. He promised
that if Capone gave him $50,000 he could double it. Capone had more
than enough funds to cover the “investment,” but he wasn’t in the habit of
entrusting large sums to total strangers. He looked the count over: Samething about the man was different-—-his classy style, his manna-r—and so
Capone decided to play along. He counted out {he bills personally and
handed them to Lustig. “Okay, Count,” said Capone. “Double it in sixty
days like you said.” Lustig left with the money, put it in a safe—deposit box
in Chicago, then headed to New York, where he had several other moneymaking schemes in progress.
The $50,000 remained in the bank box untouched. Lustig made no effort to double it. Two months later he retumed to Chicago, took the money
from the box, and paid Capone another visit. He looked at the gangstefs
stony~faced bodyguards, smiled apologetically, and said, “Please accept my
profound regrets, Mr. Capone. I’m sorry to report that the plan failed . . . I
failed.”
Capone slowly stood up. He glowered at Lustig, debating which part
of the river to throw him in. But the count reached into his coat pocket,
withdrew the $50,000, and placed it on the desk. “Here, sir, is your money,
to the penny. Again, my sincere apologies. This is most embarrassing.
Things didn’t work out the way I
thought they would. I would have loved
to have doubled your money for you and for myself»-—Lord knows I need
it--but the planjust didn’t materialize.”
Capone sagged back into his chair, confused. “I know you’re a con
man, Count,” said Capone. “I knew it the moment you walked in here. I
expected either one hundred thousand dollars or nothing. But this . . .
getting my money back . . . well.” “Again my apologies, ML Capone,” said
Lustig, as he picked up his hat and began to leave. “My God! You’re honest!” yelled Capone. “If you’re on the spot, here’s five to help you along.”
He counted out five one—thousand~dollar bills out of the $50,000. The
count seemed stunned, bowed deeply, mumbled his thanks, and left, taking the money.
The $5,000 was what Lustig had been after all along.
Interpretation
Count Victor Lustig, a man who spoke several languages and prided himself on his refinement and culture, was one of the great con arfists of modern times. He was known for his audacity, his fearlessness, and, most
important, his knowledge of human psychology. He could size up a man in
minutes, discovering his weaknesses, and he had radar for suckers. Lustig
knew that most men build up defenses against crooks and other troublemakers. The con artists job is to bring those defenses down.
One sure way to do this is through an act of apparent sincerity and
honesty. Who will distrust a
person literally caught in the act of being hon-
est? Lustig used selective honesty many times, but with Capone he went a
step further. No normal con man would have dared such a con; he would
have chosen his suckers for their meekness, for that look about them that
says they will take their medicine without complaint. Con Capone and you
would spend the rest of your life (whatever remained of it) afraid. But
Lustig understood that a man like Capone spends his life rrfistrusting others. No one around him is honest or generous, and being so much in the
company of wolves is exhausting, even depressing. A man like Capone
yearns to be the recipient of an honest or generous gesture, to feel that not
everyone has an angle or is out to rob him.
Lusiig’s act of selective honesty disarmed Capone because it was so
unexpected. A con artist loves conflicting emotions like these, since the
person caught up in them is so easily distracted and deceived.
Do not shy away from practicing this law on the Capones of the world.
With a well-timed gesture of honesty or generosity, you will have the most
brutal and cynical beast in the kingdom eating out of your hand.
Everything turns gray when I don ’t have at least one mark an the horizon.
Life then seems empty and depressing. I cannot understand honest mm.
They lead desperate lives, full ofbaredom.
(mm: ‘.1110: Lu.«u,«;, ISO!) :94?
KEYS ’l‘(.) P()\/\"l:lR
The essence of deception is distraction. Distracting the people you want to
deceive gives you the time and space to do something they won’: notice.
An act of kindness, generosity, or honesty is often the most powerful form
of distraction because it disanns other people’s suspicions. It tums them
into children, eagerly lapping up any kind of a.ft'ectiona.te gesture.
In ancient China this was called “giving before you take”--the giving
makes it hard for the other person to notice the taldng. It is a device with
infinite practical uses. Brazenly taking something from someone is dangerous, even for the powerful. The victim will plot revenge. It is also dangerous simply to ask for what you need, no matter how politely: Unless the
other person sees some gain for themselves, they may come to resent your
neediness. Learn to give before you take. It softens the ground, takes the
bite out of a future request, or simply creates a distraction. And the giving
can take many forms: an actual gift, at generous act, a kind favor, an “l1on~
est” admission-—whatever it takes.
Selective honesty is best employed on your first encounter with some
one. We are all creatures of habit, and our first impressions last a
long time.
If someone believes you are honest at the start of your relationship it takes
a lot to convince them otherwise. This gives you room to maneuver.
jay Gould, like Al Capone, was a man who distrusted everyone.
By the time he was thirty—three he was already a multimillionaire,
mostly through deception and strong-arming. In the late 1860s, Gould invested heavily in the Erie Railroad, then discovered that the market had
L/SW12 91
92, LAW l2
been flooded with a vast amount of phony stock certificates for the com»
party. He stood to lose a fortune and to suffer a lot of embarrassment.
In the midst of this crisis, a man named Lordjohn Gordon- Gordon offered to help. Gordon—Gordon, a Scottish lord, had apparently made a
small fortune investing in railroads.
By hiring some handwriting experts 'Gordon—Gordon was able to
prove to Gould that the culprits for the phony stock certificates were actually several top executives with the Erie Railroad itself. Gould was grateful.
Gordon«Gordon then proposed that he and Gould join forces to buy up a
controlling interest in Erie. Gould agreed. For a while the venture appeared to prosper. The two men were now good friends, and every time
Gordon—Gordon came to Gould asking for money to buy more stock,
Gould gave it to him. In 1873, however, Gordon-Gordon suddenly
dumped all of his stock, making a fortune but drastically lowering the value
of Gould’s own holdings. Then he disappeared from sight.
Upon investigation, Gould found out that Gordon-Gordon’s real name
was john Crowningsfield, and that he was the bastard son of a merchant
Seaman and a London barmaid. There had been many clues before then
that Goi-donvGordon was a con man, but his initial act ofhonesty and sup
port had so blinded Gould that it took the loss of millions for him to see
through the scheme.
A single act of honesty is often not enough. What is required is a
reputation for honesty, built on a. series of acts-—but these can be quite inconsequential. Once this reputation is established, as with first impressions, it is
hard to shake. ~
In ancient China, Duke Wu of Chéng decided it was time to take over
the increasingly powerful kingdom of Ho. Telling no one of his plan, he
married his daughter to Hu’s ruler. He then called a oouncil and asked his
ministers, “I am considering a military campaign. Which country should
we invade?” As he had expected, one of his ministers replied, “H11 should
be invaded.” The duke seemed angry, and said, “Hu is a sister state now.
Why do you suggest invading her?” He had the minister executed for his
impolitic remark. The ruler of Hu heard about this, and considering other
tokens of Wu’s honesty and the marriage with his daughter, he took no precautions to defend himself from Chéng. A few weeks later, Chéng forces
swept through Hu and took the country, never to relinquish it.
Honesty is one of the best ways to disarm the wary, but it is not the
only one. Any kind of noble, apparently selfless act will serve. Perhaps the
best such act, though, is one of generosity. Few people can resist a gift, even
from the most hardened enemy, which is why it is often the perfect way to
disarm people. A gift brings out the child in us, instantly lowering our dc»
lenses. Although we often view other people’s actions in the most cynical
light, we rarely see the Machiavellian element of a gift, which quite often
hides ulterior motives. A gift is the perfect object in which to hide a decep—
live move.
Over three thousand years ago the ancient Greeks traveled across the
sea to recapture the beautiful Helen, stolen away from them by Paris, and
to destroy Paris’s city, Troy. The siege lasted ten years, many heroes died,
yet neither side had come close to victory. One day, the prophet Calchas
assembled the Greeks.
“Stop battering away at these walls!” he told them. “You must find
some other way, some ruse. We cannot take
Troy by force alone. We must find some cunning
stratagem.” The cun— ning Greek leader
Odysseus then came up with the idea ofbuilding
a giant wooden horse, hiding soldiers inside it,
then offering it to the Trojans as a gift.
Neoptolemus, son of Achilles, was disgusted
with this idea; it was unmanly. Better for
thousands to die on the battlefield than to gain
victory so deceitfully. But the soldiers, faced
with a choice between another ten years of
manliness, honor, and death, on the one hand
and a quick victory on the other, chose the
horse, which was promptly built. The trick was successful and Troy fell.
One gift did more for the Greek cause than ten years of fighting.
Selective kindness should also be part of your arsenal of deception. For
years the ancient Romans had besieged the city of the Faliscans, always un~
successfully. One day, however, when the Roman general Camillus was
encamped outside the city, he suddenly saw a man leading some children
toward him. The man was a Faliscan teacher, and the children, it turned
out, were the sons and daughters of the noblest and wealthiest citizens of
the town. On the pretense of taking these children out for a walk, he had
led them straight to the Romans, offering them as hostages in hopes of ingratiating himself with Camillus, the city’s enemy.
Camillus did not take the children hostage. He stripped the teadier,
tied his hands behind his back, gave each child a rod, and let them whip
him all the way back to the city. The gesture had an immediate effect on
the Faliscans. Had Camillus used the children as hostages, some in the city
would have voted to surrender. And even if the Faliscans had gone on
fighting, their resistance would have been halfhearted. Camillus’s refusal to
take advantage of the situation broke down the Faliscans’ resistance, and
they surrendered. The general had calculated correctly. And in any case he
had had nothing to lose: He knew that the hostage ploy would not have
ended the war, at least not right away. By turning the situation around, he
earned his enemy’s trust and respecg disarming them. Selective kindness
will often break down even the most stubborn foe: Aiming right for the
heart, it corrodes the will to fight back.
Remember: By playing on people’s emotions, calculated acts of kindness can turn a Capone into a gullible child. As with any emotional approach, the tactic must be practiced with caution: If people see through it,
their disappointed feelings of gratitude and warmth will become the most
violent hatred and distrust Unless you can make the gesture seem sincere
and heartfelt, do not play with fire.
I m a
g
e: T h e
Trojan Horse.
Your guile is
hidden inside
a magnificent
gift that proves
irresistible to
your opponent.
The walls open.
Once inside,
wreak havoc.
LAW 12 1 93
94 LAW 12
Authority: When Duke Hsien
of Chin was about to raid Yii,
he presented to them a
jade
and a team of horses. When
Earl Chih was about to raid
Cl1’ou~yu, he presented to
them grand chariots. Hence
the saying: “When you are
about to take. you should
give." (Han-feivtzn, Chinese
philosopher, third century B.C.}
REVERSAL
When you have a history of deceit behind you, no amount of honesty, generosity, or kindness will fool people. In fact it will only call attention to itself. Once people have come to see you as deceitful, to act honest all of a
sudden is simply suspicious. In these cases it is better to play the rogue.
Count Lustig, pulling the biggest can of his career, was about to sell
the Eiffel Tower to an unsuspecting indusixialist who believed the government was auctioning it off for scrap metal. The industrialist was prepared
to hand over a huge sum of money to Lustig, who had successfully impersonated a government official. At the last minute, however, the mark was
suspicious. Something about Lustig bothered him. At the meeting in which
he was to hand over the money, Lustig sensed his sudden distrust.
Leaning over to the industrialist, Lustig explained, in a low whisper,
how low his salary was, how difficult his finances were, on and on. After a
few minutes of this, the industlialist realized that Lustig was asking for a
bribe. For the first time he relaxed. Now he knew he could trust Lustig:
Since all government officials were dishonest, Lustig had to be real. The
man forked over the money. By acting dishonest, Lustig seemed the real
McCoy. In this case selective honesty would have had the opposite effect.
As the French diplomat Talleyrand grew older, his reputation as a master liar and deceiver spread. At the Congress of Vienna (1814-1815), he
would spin fabulous stories and make impossible remarlm to people who
knew he had to be lying. His dishonesty had no purpose except to cloak
the moments when he really was deceiving them. One day, for example,
among friends, Talleyrand said with apparent sincerity, “In business one
ought to show one’s hand.” No one who heard him could believe their
ears: A man who never once in his life had shown his cards was telling
other people to show theirs. Tactics like this made it impossible to distinguish Talleyi-and’s real decepfions from his fake ones. By embracing his
reputation for dishonesty, he preserved his ability to deceive.
Nothing in the realm of power is set in stone. Overt deceptiveness will
sometimes cover your tracks, even making you admired for the honesty of
your dishonesty.
13
WHEN ASKING FOR HELP,
APPEAL TO PEOPLE’S
SELF-INTEREST,
NEVER TO THEIR MERCY
OR GRATITUDE
JUDGMENT
Ifyou need to cum to an allyfor help, do not bother to remind him of your past assistzmm and goad deeds. He
willfind a way to you. Instead, uncover something in your request, arr in your ailiance with him, that
will lzenqit him, and emphasize it out ofallprnportian.
Hz: will mspond enthusiastically when he sees smnetkéng
to be gainedfor himself
‘95
Illl’ |’l‘,/\."~‘A,'\'| »\'\l)
'I‘l||'.A|’|‘l -Tl{l}l'l
A peasant had in his
garden an apple-tree.
which bore no fruit, but
only served as a perch
for (he sparrows‘ and
grasshoppers. He
rc.wlvc'd to our il down,
and, taking his ax in
lmml, made a hold
stmkre at its roots. The
grasslxappzm and sparrows emreated him not
I!) cut down the tree
that .\‘h€l((‘I’(,'d them, but
to spare it, and they
would sing (0 him and
ltghlen his labors. He
paid no nrrmlzrm I0
their request, bu! gave
the tree Ll second and [1
third blow with his ax.
When he reached I/1e
hollow Uflhe true, he
found a hive full of
honey. Having tasted
the honeym11xb, he
threw down his ax, am},
looking on the tree as
sacred, took great care
ofit.
.S'clf—tn1ere.s'r alone
ntoves sorne men.
I—'Am,r:s,
Air. P.
sixru CEl\'TURY 13 <:.
96 3 LAW 13
TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW
In the early fourteenth century, a
young man named Castruccio Castracani
rose from the rank of common soldier to become lord of the great city of
Lucca, Italy. One of the most powerful families in the city, the Poggios,
had been instrumental in his climb (which succeeded through treachery
and bloodshed), but after he came to power, they came to feel he had for»
gotten them. His ambition outweighed any gratitude he felt. In 1325, while
Castruccio was away fighting Lucca’s main rival, Florence, the Poggios
conspired with other noble families in the city to rid themselves of this
troublesome and ambitious prince.
Mounting an insurrection, the plotters attacked and murdered the governor whom Castruccio had left behind to rule the city. Riots broke out,
and the Castmccio supporters and the Poggio supporters were poised to do
battle, At the height of the tension, however, Stefano di Poggio, the oldest
member of the family, intervened, and made both sides lay down their
arms.
A peaceful man, Stefano had not taken part in the conspiracy. He had
told his family it would end in a useless bloodbath. Now he insisted he
should intercede on the family’s behalf and persuade Castruccio to listen to
their complaints and satisfy their demands. Stefano was the oldest and wisest member of the clan, and his family agreed to put their trust in his diplcw
macy rather than in their weapons.
When news of the rebellion reached Castruccio, he hurried back to
Lucca. By the time he arrived, however, the fighting had ceased, through
Stefa.no’s agency, and he was surprised by the city’s calm and peace. Stefano di Poggio had imagined that Castruccio would be grateful to him for
his part in quelling the rebellion, so he paid the prince a visit. He explained
how he had brought peace, then begged for Castruccio’s mercy. He said
that the rebels in his family were young and impetuous, hungry for power
yet inexperienced; he recalled his family’s past generosity to Castzuccio.
For all these reasons, he said, the great prince should pardon the Poggios
and listen to their complaints. This, he said, was the only just thing to do,
since the family had willingly laid down their arms and had always supported him.
Castmccio listened patiently. He seemed not the slightest bit angry or
resentful. Instead, he told Stefano to rest assured that justice would prevail,
and he asked him to bring his entire family to the palace to talk over their
grievances and come to an agreement. As they took leave of one another,
Castruccio said he thanked God for the chance he had been given to show
his clemency and kindness. That evening the entire Poggio family came to
the palace. Castruccio immediately had them imprisoned and a few days
later all were executed, including Stefano.
Interpretation
Stefano di Poggio is the embodiment of all those who believe that the justice and nobility of their cause will prevail, Certainly appeals to justice and
gratitude have occasionally succeeded in the past, but more often than not
they have had dire consequences, especially in dealings with the Castruc
cios of the world. Stefano knew that the prince had risen to power through
treachery and ruthlessness. This was a man, after all, who had put a close
and devoted friend to death. When Castruccio was told that it had been a
terrible wrong to kill such an old friend, he replied that he had executed
not an old friend but a new enemy.
A man like Castruccio knows only force and self—interest. When the rebellion began, to end it and place oneself at his mercy was the most dan—
gerous possible move. Even once Stefano di Poggio had made that fatal
mistake, however, he still had options: He could have offered money to
Castruccio, could have made promises for the future, could have pointed
out what the Poggios could still contribute to Castruccio’s power-their influence with the most influential families of Rome, for example, and the
great marriage they could have brokered.
Instead Stefano brought up the past, and debts that carried no obligation. Not only is a man not obliged to be grateful, gratitude is often a terrible burden that he gladly discards. And in this case Castruccio rid himself
of his obligations to the Poggios by eliminating the Poggios.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
In 4-33 B.C., just before the Peloponnesian War, the island of Corcyra (later
called Corfu) and the Greek city~state of Corinth stood on the brink of conflict. Both parties sent ambassadors to Athens to try to win over the Atheni~
ans to their side. The stakes were high, since whoever had Athens on his
side was sure to win. And whoever won the war would certainly give the
defeated side no mercy.
Corcyra spoke first. Its ambassador began by admitting that the island
had never helped Athens before, and in fact had allied itself with Athens’s
enemies. There were no ties of friendship or gratitude between Corcyra
and Athens. Yes, the ambassador achnitted, he had come to Athens now
out of fear and concern for Corcyra’s safety. The only thing he could offer
was an alliance of mutual interests. Corcyra had a
navy only surpassed in
size and strength by Athens’s own; an alliance between the two states
would create a formidable force, one that could intimidate the rival state of
Sparta. That, unfortunately, was all Oorcyra had to offer.
The representative from Corinth then gave a brilliant, passionate
speech, in sharp contrast to the dry, colorless approach of the Corcyran.
He talked ofeverything Corinth had done for Athens in the past. He asked
how it would look to Athens’s other allies if the city put an agreement with
a former enemy over one with a
present friend, one that had served
Athens’s interest loyally: Perhaps those allies would break their agreements
with Athens if they saw that their loyalty was not valued. He referred to
Hellenic law, and the need to repay Corinth for all its good deeds. He finally went on to list the many services Corinth had performed for Athens,
and the importance of showing gratitude to one’s friends.
After the speech, the Athenians debated the issue in an assembly. On
Most men are so thoroughly xubjeciive that
nothing really intermls
zhem bu! 1hmn.reIw.v.
T/zr,-y always think of
their own casn at man
as (war any remark is
made, and their whole
auenukm is erzgrmxscd
and abvorbed by
the
Inerest clmnre rr:fr:rmure to anything which
uffct/s them personally,
be it never so rcrnoze.
/\R1‘liUR
S(:xmm«‘r~:uALrr-.12.
l7XX—l8tI(l
LAW I3 97
‘)5’: LAW 13
the second round, they voted overwhelmingly to ally with Corcyra and
drop Corinth.
Interpretation
History has remembered the Athenians nobly, but they were the preeminent realists of classical Greece. With them, all the rhetoric, all the emotional appeals in the world, could not match a good pragmatic argument,
especially one that added to their power.
What the Corinthian ambassador did not realize was that his references to Corinth’s past generosity to Athens only irritated the Athenians,
subtly asking them to feel guilty and putting them under obligation. The
Athenians couldn’t care less about past favors and friendly feelings. At the
same time, they knew that if their other allies thought them ungrateful for
abandoning Corinth, these city-states would still be unlikely to break their
ties to Athens, the preeminent power in Greece. Athens ruled its empire by
force, and would simply compel any rebellious ally to return to the fold.
When people choose between talk about the past and talk about the
future, a pragmatic person will always opt for the future and forget the past.
As the Corcyrans realized, it is always best to speak pragmatically to a
pragmatic person. And in the end, most people are in fast pragmatic-—they
will rarely act against their own self-interest.
It has always been a rule that the weak should be subject to the strong;
and besides, we consider that we am worthy of our power. Up till the
present moment you, too, used to think that we were; but now. after
calculating your own interest, you are beginning to talk in terms ofright
and wrong. Conréderatiores ofthis kind have neveryet turned people aside
[mm the opportunities of agrandizemeni offered by superior strength.
A thenmrr. r.’pre.rwata.£ir»s' lo Sf1Irrifi.
quulmi in The Pcloponnesian War, '£‘hur._wiz'dn.i, (2. 4(15» 395 14.1.’.
KEYS TO POWER
In your quest for power, you will constantly find yourself in the position of
asking for help from those more powerful than you. There is an art to asking for help, an art that depends on your ability to understand the person
you are dealing with, and to not confuse your needs with theirs.
Most people never succeed at this, because they are completely
trapped in their own wants and desires. They start from the assumption
that the people they are appealing to have a selfless interest in helping
them. They talk as if their needs mattered to these peopleowho probably
couldn’t care less. Sometimes they refer to larger issues: a
great cause, or
grand emotions such as love and gratitude. They go for the big picture
when simple, everyday realities would have much more appeal. What they
do not realize is that even the most powerful person is locked inside needs
of his own, and that if you make no appeal to his selfdnterest, he merely
sees you as desperate or, at best, a waste of time.
In the sixteenth century, Portuguese missionaries tried for years to con
vert the people ofjapan to Catholicism, while at the same time Portugal
had a monopoly on trade between japan and Europe. Although the missionaries did have some success, they never got far among the ruling elite;
by the beginning of the seventeenth century, in fact, their proselytizing had
completely antagonized the Japanese emperor Ieyasu. When the Dutch
began to arrive in japan in great numbers, Ieyasu was much relieved. He
needed Europeans for their know-how in guns and navigation, and here at
last were Europeans who cared nothing for spreading religion——the Dutch
wanted only to trade. Ieyasu swiftly moved to evict the Portuguese. From
then on, he would only deal with the practicalminded Dutch.
Japan and Holland were vastly different cultures, but each shared a
timeless and universal concern: selfiinterest. Every person you deal with is
like another culuire, an alien land with a past that has nothing to do with
yours. Yet you can bypass the differences between you and him by appealing to his self—interest. Do not be subtle: You have valuable knowledge to
share, you will fill his coffers with gold, you will make him live longer and
happier. This is a
language that all of us speak and understand.
A key step in the process is to understand the other person’s psychol~
ogy. Is he vain? Is he concerned about his reputation or his social standing?
Does he have enemies you could help him vanquish? Is he simply mod»
vated by money and power?
When the Mongols invaded China in the twelfth century, they threab
erred to obliterate a culture that had thrived for over two thousand years.
Their leader, Genghis Khan, saw nothing in China. but a
country that
lacked pasturing for his horses, and he decided to destroy the place, IeveI~
ing all its cities, for “it would be better to exterminate the Chinese and let
the grass grow.” It was not a soldier, a. general, or a king who saved the
Chinese from devastation, but a man named Yelu Ch’u—Ts’ai. A foreigner
himself, Ch’u«Ts’ai had come to appreciate the superiority of Chinese culture. He managed to make himself a trusted adviser to Genghis Khan, and
persuaded him that he would reap riches out of the place if, instead of de
straying it, he simply taxed everyone who lived there. Khan saw the wisdom in this and did as Ch’u—Ts‘a.i advised.
When Khan took the city of Kaifeng, after a
long siege, and decided to
massaxtre its inhabitants (as he had in other cities that had resisted him),
Ch’u~Ts’ai told him that the finest craftsmen and engineers in China had
fled to Kaifeng, and it would be better to put them to use. Kaifeng was
spared. Never before had Genghis Khan shown such mercy, but then it
really wasn’t mercy that saved Kaifeng. Ch‘u—Ts’ai knew Khan well. He was
a barbaric peasant who cared nothing for culuire, or indeed for anything
other than warfare and practical results. Ch’u—Ts’ai chose to appeal to the
only emotion that would work on such a man: greed.
Self-interest is the lever that will move people. Once you make them
see how you can in some way meet their needs or advance their cause,
their resistance to your requests for help will magically fall away. At each
step on the way to acquiring power, you must train yourself to think your
LAW 13 99
1 00 LAW 13
way inside the other persorfs mind, to see their needs and interests, to get
rid of the screen of your own feelings that obscure the truth. Master this an
and there will be no limits to what you can accomplish.
Image: A Cord that
Binds. The cord of
mercy and gratitude is threadbare.
and will break at
the first shock.
Do not throw
such a lifeline.
T h e c o r d 0 f
mutual self-interest is woven of
many fibers and
cannot easily be
severed. It will serve
you well for years.
Authority: The shortest and best way to make your for
tune is to let people see clearly that it is in their interests
to promote yours. (jean de La Bruyere. l645—169(i)
REVERSAI.
Some people will see an appeal to their selfiinterest as ugly and ignoble.
They actually prefer to be able to exercise charity, mercy, and justice,
which are their ways of feeling superior to you: When you beg them for
help, you emphasize their power and position. They are strong enough to
need nothing from you except the chance to feel superior. This is the wine
that intoxicates them. They are dying to fund your project, to introduce
you to powerful people———provided, of course, that all this is done in public,
and for a good cause (usually the more public, the better). Not everyone,
then, can be approached through cynical self—interest. Some people will be
put off by it, because they dorft want to seem to be motivated by such
things. They need opportunities to display their good heart,
Do not be shy. Give them that opportunity. It’s not as if you are con»
ning them by asking for help——it is really their pleasure to give, and to be
seen giving. You must distinguish the differences among powerful people
and figure out what makes them tick. When they ooze greed, do not appeal
to their charity. When they want to look charitable and noble, do not appeal to their greed.
LAW
14
P()SElAS.AfiFRIEPJD,
VVCHRKQAS.A.SPY’
JUDGMENT
Knowing about your rival is critical. Use spies’ to gather
valuable infmrmation that will keep you a
step ahead.
Better stz'll: Play the spy yourself. In polite social encoun~
ters, learn to pmbe. Ask indirect questions to get people to
reveal their weaknesses and intentions. There is no occasion that is not an ojiponfunityfor artful spying.
107
I02 LAW 14
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
Joseph Duveen was undoubtedly the greatest art dealer of his time—from
1904 to 194-0 he almost single—handedly rnonopolized America’s millionaire art-collecting market. But one prize plum eluded him: the industrialist
Andrew Mellon. Before he died, Duveen was determined to make Mellon
a client.
Duveen’s friends said this was an impossible dreani. Mellon was a stiff,
taciturn man. The stories he had heard about the congenial, talkative Duveen rubbed him the wrong way—-he had made it clear he had no desire to
meet the man. Yet Duveen told his doubting friends, “Not only will Mellon
buy from me but he will buy only from me.” For several years he tracked
his prey, learning the man’s habits, tastes, phobias. To do this, he secretly
put several ofMellon’s staff on his own payroll, worming valuable information out of them. By the time he moved into action, he knew Mellon about
as well as Mellon’s wife did.
In 1921 Mellon was visiting London, and staying in a palatial suite on
the third floor of Claridge’s Hotel. Duveen booked himself into the suite
just below Mellon’s, on the second floor. He had arranged for his valet to
befriend Mellon’s valet, and on the fateful day he had chosen to make his
move, Mellon’s valet told Duveen’s valet, who told Duveen, that he had
just helped Mellon on with his overcoat, and that the industrialist was making his way down the corridor to ring for the lift.
Duveen’s valet hurriedly helped Duveen with his own overcoat. Sec»
onds later, Duveen entered the lift, and lo and behold, there was Mellon.
“How do you do, Mr. Mellon?” said Duveen, introducing himself. “I am on
my way to the National Gallery to look at some pictures.” How uncannythat was precisely where Mellon was headed. And so Duveen was able to
accompany his prey to the one location that would ensure his success. He
knew Mellon’s taste inside and out, and while the two men wandered
through the museum, he dazzled the magnate with his knowledge. Once
again quite uncannily, they seemed to have remarkably similar tastes.
Mellon was pleasantly surprised: This was not the Duveen he had expected. The man was charming and agreeable, and clearly had exquisite
taste. When they returned to New York, Mellon visited Duveen’s exclusive
gallery and fell in love with the collection. Everything, surprisingly enough,
seemed to be precisely the kind of work he wanted to collect. For the rest
of his life he was Duveen’s best and most generous client.
Interpretation
A man as ambitious and competitive as Joseph Duveen left nothing to
chance. What’s the point of winging ig ofjust hoping you may be able to
charm this or that client? It’s like shooting ducks blindfolded. Arm yourself
with a little knowledge and your aim improves.
Mellon was the most spectacular of Duveen’s catches, but he spied on
many a millionaire. By secretly putting members of his clients’ household
staffs on his own payroll, he would gain constant access to valuable infor-
mation about their masters’ comings and goings, changes in taste, and
other such tidbits of information that would put him a
step ahead. A rival
of Duveen’s who wanted to make Henry Frick a client noticed that whenever he visited this wealthy New Yorker, Duveen was there before him, as
if he had a sixth sense. To other dealers Duveen seemed to be everywhere,
and to know everything before they did. His powers discouraged and disheartened them, until many simply gave up going after the wealthy clients
who could make a dealer rich.
Such is the power of artful spying: It makes you seem all—powerful,
clairvoyant. Your knowledge ofyour mark can also make you seem charming, so well can you anticipate his desires. No one sees the source of your
power, and what they cannot see they cannot fight.
Rulers see through spies, as cows through smell, Bmhmins through
scriptures and the rest ofthe people through their normal eyes.
Kantily/1, Indian philmoplm; third amtury 3.1:.
KEYS TO POWER
In the realm of power, your goal is a degree of control over future events.
Part of the problem you face, then, is that people won’t tell you all their
thoughts, emotions, and plans. Controlling what they say, they often keep
the most critical parts of their character hidden—their weaknesses, ulterior
motives, obsessions. The result is that you cannot predict their moves, and
are constantly in the dark. The trick is to find a way to probe them, to find
out their secrets and hidden intentions, without letting them know what
you are up to.
This is not as difficult as you might think. A friendly front will let you
secretly gather information on friends and enemies alike. Let others consult the horoscope, or read tarot cards: You have more concrete means of
seeing into the future.
The most common way of spying is to use other people, as Duveen
did. The method is simple, powerful, but risky: You will certainly gather information, but you have little control over the people who are doing the
work. Perhaps they will ineptly reveal your spying, or even secretly turn
against you. It is far better to be the spy yourself, to pose as a friend while
secretly gathering information.
The French politician Talleyrand was one of the greatest practitioners
of this art. He had an uncanny ability to worm secrets out of people in palite conversation. A contemporary of his, Baron de Vitrolles, wrote, “Wit
and grace marked his conversation. He possessed the art of concealing his
thoughts or his malice beneath a
transparent veil of insinuations, words
that imply something more than they express. Only when necessary did he
inject his own personality.” The key here is Talleyrand’s ability to suppress
himself in the conversation, to make others talk endlessly about themselves
and inadvertently reveal their intentions and plans.
LAW 14 103
Ifyon have reaxon to
suspect that a
[lemon :5
Iellingyuu a lie, Io/Ik ax
(hmzgh you lzzlicved
ewry word he said.
Thix willgive him
coumgr: to gr; on; he
will become more
Vt’/1(,’mI'Nl in Im
a.s:m‘ltons, and in the
and betray hitnreljj
Again, ifyou perceive
thal a person iv trying
to ¢:zmL'ruI so-nmlhing
from you, but with only
partial Sl.(f‘l‘t?A‘.\', look as
though you did not
believe him. The uppo»
sition on your part will
provoke him into leading out his re:\‘¢'rve of
mu/1 and bringing the
whole force of it to
Imrr upon your
l'rIcrez1u7r':y.
A R Fl II ;x
S\"llOPl-INlIAI.‘l£R,
l78X»lX6(l
104 LAW 14
Throughout Talleyrand’s life, people said he was a superb conversationalist—yet he actually said very little. He never talked about his own
ideas; he got others to reveal theirs. He would organize friendly games of
charades for foreign diplomats, social gatherings where, however, he
would carefully weigh their words, cajole confidences out of them, and
gather information invaluable to his work as France’s foreign minister. At
the Congress of Vienna (1814-1815) he did his spying in other ways: He
would blurt out what seemed to be a secret (actually something he had
made up), then watch his listeners’ reactions. He might tell a gathering of
diplomats, for instance, that a reliable source had revealed to him that the
czar of Russia was planning to arrest his top general for treason. By watching the diplomats’ reactions to this madealp story, he would know which
ones were most excited by the weakening of the Russian army—~perhaps
their goverments had designs on Russia? As Baron Von Stetten said,
“Monsieur Talleyrand fires a pistol into the air to see who will jump out the
window.”
During social gatherings and innocuous encounters, pay attention.
This is when people’s guards are down. By suppressing your own personality, you can make them reveal things. The brilliance of the maneuver is
that they will mistake your interest in them for friendship, so that you not
only learn, you malce allies.
Nevertheless, you should practice this tactic with caution and care. If
people begin to suspect you are worming secrets out of them under the
cover of conversation, they will strictly avoid you. Emphasize friendly
chatter, not valuable information. Your search for gems ofinformation cannot be too obvious, or your probing questions will reveal more about your
self and your intentions than about the information you hope to find.
A trick to try in spying comes from La Rochefoucauld, who wrote,
“Sincerity is found in very few men, and is often the cleverest of ruses——
one is sincere in order to draw out the confidence and secrets of the other.”
By pretending to bare your heart to another person, in other words, you
make them more likely to reveal their own secrets. Give them a
false con‘
fession and they will give you a real one. Another trick was identified by
the philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer, who suggested vehemently contradicting people you’re in conversation with as a way of irritating them, stir—
ring them up so that they lose some of the control over their words. In their
emotional reaction they will reveal all kinds of truths about themselves,
truths you can later use against them.
Another method of indirect spying is to test people, to lay little traps
that make them reveal things about themselves. Chosroes II, a notoriously
clever seventlrcentury king of the Persians, had many ways of seeing
through his subjects without raising suspicion. If he noticed, for instance,
that two of his couruers had become particularly friendly, he would call
one of them aside and say he had information that the other was a traitor,
and would soon be killed. The king would tell the courtier he tmsted him
more than anyone, and that he must keep this information secret. Then he
would watch the two men carefully. If he saw that the second courtier had
not changed in his behavior toward the king, he would conclude that the
first courtier had kept the secret, and he would quickly promote the man,
later taking him aside to confess, “I meant to kill your friend because of
certain information that had reached me, but, when I
investigated the matter, I found it was untrue.” If, on the other hand, the second courtier started
to avoid the king, acting aloof and tense, Chosroes would know that the se
cret had been revealed. He would ban the second courtier from his court,
letting him know that the whole business had only been a test, but that
even though the man had done nothing wrong, he could no longer trust
him. The first courtier, however, had revealed a secret, and him Chosroes
would ban from his entire kingdom.
It may seem an odd form of spying that reveals not empirical informa:
tion but a person’s character. Often, however, it is the best way of solving
problems before they arise.
By tempting people into certain acts, you learn about their loyalty,
their honesty, and so on. And this kind of knowledge is often the most
valuable of all: Armed with it, you can predict their actions in the future.
[ m a
g
e :
The Third Eye of
the Spy. In the land of
the two-eyed, the third eye
gives you the omniscience
of a god. You see further than
others, and you see deeper
into them. Nobody is
safe from the eye
but you.
Authority: Now, the reason a brilliant sovereign and a wise general
conquer the enemy whenever they move, and their achievements
surpass those of ordinary men, is their foreknowledge of the enemy
situation. This “foreknowledge” cannot be elicited from spirits, nor
from gods, nor by analogy with past events, not by astrologic calcu
lations. It must be obtained from men who know the enemy situati0n—-from spies. (Sun-tzu, The Art if War, fourth century B.C.)
LAW 14 I05
106 LAW H
REVERSAL
Information is critical to power, but just as you spy on other people, you
must be prepared for them to spy on you. One of the most potent weapons
in the battle for information, then, is giving out false information. As Mnston Churchill said, “Truth is so precious that she should always be at»
tended by a bodyguard of lies.” You must surround yourself with such a
bodyguard, so that your truth cannot be penetrated. By planting the information of your choice, you control the game.
In 1944 the Nazis’ rocket-bomb attacks on London suddenly escalated.
Over two thousand V-1 flying bombs fell on the city, killing more than five
thousand people and wounding many more, Somehow, however, the Germans consistently missed their targets. Bombs that were intended for
Tower Bridge, or Piccadilly, would fall well short of the city, landing in the
less populated suburbs. This was because, in fixing their targets, the Germans relied on secret agents they had planted in England. They did not
know that these agents had been discovered, and that in their place,
English—c0ntrolled agents were feeding them subtly deceptive information.
The bombs would hit farther and farther from their targets every time
they fell. By the end of the campaign they were landing on cows in the
country. By feeding people wrong information, then, you gain a potent ad
vantage. While spying gives you a third eye, disinformation puts out one of
your enemy’s eyes. A cyclops, he always misses his target.
LAW
15
(ZRIJSEIYNDLH
EPJEhAY'TT)T¥&LIJ{
JUDGMENT
All greai leaders since Moses have known that a
fe(med
enemy must be crushed completely. (Sometimes they have
learned this the hard way.) Ifmze ember is kgfi alight, no
matter how dimly it smotders, afim will eventually break
out. More is £05: timmgh stopping hagfway than through
mtal annihilation: The enemy will recover; and will seek
revenge. Crush him, not only in body but in spiiit.
f 107
7'/11' remmmzs ofmz
erieniy can ht‘(‘t,‘.Vf1t’
uriiw. like lIm,\'r.’ ofa
4I1rm.\(' orfin‘. Ilclzct’.
ilmw Sitould be enernzinalcd c'mnpIcIr'/y. . . .
One xlmultl never
igrmro rm manry,
k/zow:'ug!1iIn to be
weak. He a’u‘z'omes
<Ilmr;eruur in due
mur.w, It/(P the spark
0/'fir<.' in 14 Izaysluek.
Km,» I’iLYA,
INIH/\N PHiLi)$l)ir‘HFR,
‘IHIRU t‘l<.‘l'I‘\fR\’ tax.
‘|'Hl~. |‘l(—\P H
wM'\|l§y‘\(1| .1 ‘\
On the day Ramiro
was eaiemzezt.
’
/’Burgr'a/‘ quit Cl'.)'(?ViLi‘,
lreuvmg (he muliluted
hudy an the town
square, and rr1arrIu>r.i
xnu 1/I. Three days lam:
hn zrrrtred :11 Farzo,
Wht‘I'L‘ he rL'c‘m'vezI the
(’IlVU_Vs‘ Uflhe z‘lI_\= of
Ancmw, who assured
him Of!/l(‘ii’ loyalty.
A nmssertger/rurra
Vltvllozzo Vmzlli
ummunced {lull the
little /ldrrzrlic par! of
Siniguglin had .s'w‘rw1-
rlrrrvd to the C(7l1LlOIll€!1'l
/mercenary soldiers]
Only Iiw cimrlrrl, in
drnrgc afilm Genoese
Andrea Daria. still
/XL‘/(1 (ml, and l)nmr
refllxezi to hand it ovrrr
m azzyom: creep:
(Tamra /aimse/1.
/Borgild rml word
Illa! he would l1N1t’(‘.
lhe ne :2 rluy, which
was far! wine: the
1(}A.‘3\ LAW 15
'1‘RANSGRESS[Ol\' OF THE LAW
No rivalry between leaders is more celebrated in Chinese history than the
struggle between Hsiang Yu and Liu Pang. These two generals began their
careers as friends, fighting on the same side. Hsiang Yu came from the nobility; large and powerful, given to bouts of violence and temper, a bit dullwitted, he was yet a mighty warrior who always fought at the head of his
troops. Liu Pang came from peasant stock. He had never been much of a
soldier, and preferred women and wine to fighting; in fact, he was some
thing of a scoundrel. But he was wily, and he had the ability to recognize
the best strategists, keep them as his advisers, and listen to their advice. He
had risen in the army through these strengths.
In 208 13.0., the king of Ch’u sent two massive armies to conquer the
powerful kingdom of Ch’in. One army went north, under the generalship
of Sung Yi, with Hsiang Yu second in command; the other, led by Liu
Pang, headed straight toward Ch’in. The target was the kingdom’s splendid
capital, Hsien-yang. And Hsiang Yu, ever violent and impatient, could not
stand the idea that Liu Pang would get to Hsietryang first, and perhaps
would assume command of the entire anny.
At one point on the northern front, Hsiang’s commander, Sung Yi,
hesitated in sending his troops into battle. Furious, Hsiang entered Sung
Yi’s tent, proclaimed him a traitor, cut offhis head, and assumed sole com~
mand of the army. Without waiting for orders, he left the northern front
and marched directly on Hsien—yang. He felt certain he was the better soldier and general than Liu, but, to his utter astonishment, his rival, leading a
smaller, swifter army, managed to reach Hsien-yang first. Hsiang had an
adviser, Fan Tseng, who warned him, “This village headman [Liu Fang]
used to be greedy only for riches and women, but since entering the capital
he has not been led astray by wealth, wine, or sex. That shows he is aiming
high.”
Fan Tseng urged Hsiang to kill his rival before it was too late. He told
the general to invite the wily peasant to a banquet at their camp outside
Hsien-yang, and, in the midst of a celebratory sword dance, to have his
head out off. The invitation was sent; Liu fell for the trap, and came to the
banquet. But I-Isiang hesitated in ordering the sword dance, and by the
time he gave the signal, Liu had sensed a
trap, and managed to escape.
“Bah!” cried Fan Tseng in disgust, seeing that Hsiang had botched the plot.
“One cannot plan with 3. simpleton. Liu Pang will steal your empire yet
and make us all his prisoners."
Realizing his mistake, Hsiang hurriedly marched on Hsien-yang, this
time determined to hack off his rival’s head. Liu was never one to fight
when the odds were against him, and he abandoned the city. Hsiang cap~
tured Hsien-yang, murdered the young prince of Ch’in, and burned the
city to the ground. Liu was now Hsiang’s bitter enemy, and he pursued
him for many months, finally cornering him in a walled city. Lacking food,
his army in disarray, Liu sued for peace.
Again Fan Tseng wamed Hsiang, “Crush him now! If you let him go
again, you will be sorry later.” But Hsiang decided to be merciful. He
wanted to bring Liu back to Ch’u alive, and to force his former friend to acknowledge him as master. But Fan proved right: Liu managed to use the
negotiations for his surrender as a distraction, and he escaped with a small
army. Hsiang, amazed that he had yet again let his rival slip away, once
more set out after Liu, this time with such ferocity that he seemed to have
lost his mind. At one point, having captured Liu’s father in battle, Hsiang
stood the old man up during the fighting and yelled to Liu across the line of
troops, “Surrender now, or I shall boil your father alive!” Liu calmly arr
swered, “But we are sworn brothers. So my father is your father also. If you
insist on boiling your own father, send me a bowl of the soup!” Hsiang
backed down, and the struggle continued.
A few weeks later, in the thick of the hunt, Hsiang scattered his forces
unwisely, and in a
surprise attack Liu was able to surround his main garrison. For the first time the tables were turned. Now it was Hsiang who sued
for peace. Liu’s top adviser urged him to destroy Hsiang, crush his army,
show no mercy. “To let him go would be like rearing a
tiger——it will devour
you later,” the adviser said. Liu agreed.
Making a false treaty, he lured Hsiarig into relaxing his defense, then
slaughtered almost all of his army. Hsiang managed to escape. Alone and
on foot, knowing that Liu had put a bounty on his head, he came upon a
small group of his own retreating soldiers, and cried out, “I hear Liu Pang
has offered one thousand pieces ofgold and a fief of ten thousand families
for my head. Let me do you a favor.” Then he slit his own throat and died.
Interpretation
Hsiang Yu had proven his ruthlessness on many an occasion. He rarely
hesitated in doing away with a rival if it served his purposes. But with Liu
Pang he acted differently. He respected his rival, and did not want to defeat
him through deception; he wanted to prove his superiority on the battle
field, even to force the clever Liu to surrender and to serve him. Every time
he had his rival in his hands, something made him hesitat&——a fatal sympa~
thy with or respect for the man who, after all, had once been a friend and
comrade in arms. But the moment Hsiang made it clear that he intended to
do away with Liu, yet failed to accomplish it, he sealed his own doom. Liu
would not suffer the same hesitation once the tables were tamed.
This is the fate that faces all of us when we sympathize with our ene
mics, when pity, or the hope of reconciliation, makes us pull back from
doing away with them. We only strengthen their fear and hatred of us. We
have beaten them, and they are humiliated; yet we nurture these resentful
vipers who will one day kill us. Power cannot be dealt with this way. It
must be exterrninated, crushed, and denied the chance to return to haunt
us. This is all the truer with a former friend who has become an enemy.
The law governing fatal antagonisnis reads: Reconciliation is out of the
question. Only one side can win, and it must win totally.
Liu Pang learned this lesson well. After defeating Hsiang Yu, this son
condoitien waizlrd m
/war. ()I1L‘f’ in’ reurhuzl
Sinigriglirx. Ccstire
would he an €‘(Lt‘,V pry);
caught between the
cimrlr-I and tlwirjnruzs
ringizzg rlqv town. .. .
'/‘hr condottieri were
sure they had milzmry
.s'uperim'ity. believing
that the Ilepurmre of
the Frmch troops lmd
left (.‘c.mre with only
11 mm)!firfsic’.
In. fact. at-rordirsg zo
M(zchiav¢>l1i, ffiarginj
had left (‘arena with
rm tlroustmd r'nfzm:r_x~’~
men and three thousand Iznrse, taking
pairls to spin up his
nzew so thin‘ they would
march along parallel
roams beforz? r:onvergmg on Sirtigagliu. Tilt‘
re'u.ynr1 for such a
large
force was that he knew.
from a crmfmwiozz
(’x(mr,'Ie<l from Ramiro
([1! Lara), wlml the
condouicri had up
their sleeve. He {lIer(‘—
fore decided re turn
their own imp zrgniozsi
them. This was the
muslerpiece oftrickery
Ihal the historian Paolo
G'imsio later called “thrmagnijirenr z1i—a»it.“
Al rlzxwn on December
31/1502], Cestlre
rcurluzd the nutxkir/.y of
Siniguglilz. . ..Led by
Mit'ltel()lI() Corvllu.
Cesare ad mrzce guard
of two ltumlrcd laI1fP.\'
look up its prlrltiotl on
the (amt! bridge. . . .
'I‘i:is corztml ofrhe
bridge effectively
prevented the ,c:mr;2z'ra«
tors‘ troops from with- '
Ilmwlhlg, . . .
Cesare greeted the
condouieri offusivcly
and irzllitezl them to
j()ll’l him. . . . A/Iirlzelorlu
LAW 15 I09
hm! prvpurmi the
!’aIa7.:'.n l2ermIr(lt'no
/or (/m‘a1/u's' l(.~'(', and
the zlu/<4: Em-'izwl the
condotticri ittxizlr‘. _ . .
Once imfoorx the men
wvlr (,'HI.x'I1VV nrrzrstvc!
by 5,-uarz'l.s' who crept up
front line rear. . . .
I(‘e.\‘arcI/ gave ttrtiem
_/or rm attack on
Vitellz ‘.5 am! Orsini Ir
.x-ulditvx in the outlying
areas. . . . '1'izuzm'ght,
while zlmir rmopi were
helm; crlmlwd, Michelazm rhrnulrd ()Iuw—
mtto and Vilelli in me
Ilernarrlirm palacrr. . . .
.-‘l1 one JP/l .i’wL>up,
,’I3m_<.;iu/ had got rid of
his former generals and
worxt mtczrlies,
‘rm-: zmnums.
haw (‘i.m;:.Ax.
193‘)
To have zzizinzlete
vmury, you rrnm In:
ruihlexs.
N/\voLmN B<>N,M’ARTr-,,
l 7(i‘)~ 1 821
110 , LAW15
of a farmer went on to become supreme commander of the armies of Ch’u.
Crushing his next n'val—the king of Ch’u, his own former leader—l1e
crowned himself emperor, defeated everyone in his path, and went down
in history as one of the greatest rulers of China, the immortal Han Kao-tsu,
founder of the Han Dynasty.
Those who seek to achieve things should Show no mercy.
Kuutilyu, Indian plzilnsupher, zhml century 11. (I.
OBSERVANCE OF ‘THE LAW
Wu Chan, born in Ad). 625, was the daughter of a duke, and as a. beautiful
young woman of many charms, she was accordingly attached to the harem
ofEmperor T’a.i Tsung.
The imperial harem was a dangerous place, full of young concubines
vying to become the emperor’s favorite. Wu’s beauty and forceful character quickly won her this battle, but, knowing that an emperor, like other
powerful men, is a creature ofwhim, and that she could easily be replaced,
she kept her eye on the future.
Wu managed to seduce the emperor’s dissolute son, Kao Tsung, on the
only possible occasion when she could find him alone: while he was relieving himself at the royal urinal. Even so, when the emperor died and Ken
Tsung took over the throne, she still suffered the fate to which all wives and
concubines of a deceased emperor were bound by tradition and law: Her
head shaven, she entered a convent, for what was supposed to be the rest
of her life. For seven years Wu schemed to escape. By communicating in
secret with the new emperor, and by befiiencling his wife, the empress, she
managed to get a highly unusual royal edict allowing her to return to the
palace and to the royal harem. Once there, she fawned on the empress,
while still sleeping with the emperor. The empress did not discourage
this—--she had yet to provide the emperor with an heir, her position was
vulnerable, and Wu was a valuable ally.
In 654 Wu Chao gave birth to a child. One day the empress came to
visit, and as soon as she had left, Wu smothered the newborn——her own
baby. When the murder was discovered, suspicion immediately fell on the
empress, who had been on the scene moments earlier, and whose jealous
nature was known by all. This was precisely Wu’s plan. Shortly thereafter,
the empress was charged with murder and executed. Wu Chao was
crowned empress in her place. Her new husband, addicted to his life of
pleasure, gladly gave up the reins of government to Wu Chao, who was
from then on known as Empress Wu.
Although now in a position of great power, Wu hardly felt secure.
There were enemies everywhere; she could not let down her guard for one
moment. Indeed, when she was forty-one, she began to fear that her bean~
tiful young niece was becoming the emperor’s favorite. She poisoned the
woman with a clay mixed into her food. In 675 her own son, touted as the
heir apparent, was poisoned as well. The next—eldest son———illegil:'ma.te, but
now the crown prince——was exiled a little later on trumped—up charges.
And when the emperor died, in 683, Wu managed to have the son after
that declared unfit for the throne. All flris meant that it was her youngest,
most ineffectual son who finally ‘became emperor. In this way she continued to rule.
Over the next five years there were innumerable palace coups. All of
them failed, and all of the conspirators were executed. By 688 there was no
one left to challenge Wu. She proclaimed herself a divine descendant of
Buddha, and in 690 her wishes were finally granted: She was named Holy
and Divine “Emperor” of China.
Wu became emperor because there was literally nobody le-R from the
previous "Pang dynasty. And so she ruled unchallenged, for over a decade
ofrelative peace. In 705, at the age of eighty, she was forced to abdicate.
Interpretation
All who knew Empress Wu remarked on her energy and intelligence. At
the time, there was no glory available for an ambitious woman beyond a
few years in the imperial harem, then a lifetime walled up in a convent. In
Wu’s gradual but remarkable rise to the top, she was never naive. She
knew that any hesitation, any momentary weakness, would spell her and.
If, every time she got rid of a rival a new one appeared, the solution was
simple: She had to crush them all or be killed herself. Other emperors be
fore her had followed the same path to the top, but Wu-«who, as a woman,
had next to no chance to gain power———had to be more ruthless still.
Empress Wu’s forly—year reign was one of the longest in Chinese history. Although the story of her bloody rise to power is well known, in
China she is considered one of the period’s most able and effective rulers.
A priest asked the dying Spanish statesman and general Ramon Maria Narvdez
(1800-1868), “Does yourExcellency forgive all your enemies?” “I do not
have to forgive my ene1nies,"anrwmed Narmiez, “I have had them all shat. ”
KEYS TO POWER
It is no accident that the two stories illustrating this law come from China:
Chinese history abounds with examples of enemies who were left alive and
returned to haunt the lenient. “Crush the enemy” is a key strategic tenet of
Surrtzu, the fourth—century—B.C. author of TheArt ofl/Wzr. The idea is simple:
Your enemies wish you ill. There is nothing they want more than to eliminate you. If, in your struggles with them, you stop halfway or even three
quarters of the way, out of mercy or hope ofreconciliation, you only make
them more determined, more embittered, and they will someday take revenge. They may act friendly for the time being, but this is only because
you have defeated them. They have no choice but to bide their time.
The solution: Have no mercy. Crush your enemies as totally as they
LAW 15 I71
I12 LAW 15
would crush you. Ultimately the only peace and security you can hope for
from your enemies is their disappearance.
Mao Tse—tung, a devoted reader of Sun—tzu and of Chinese history gexr
erally, knew the importance ofthis law. In i934 the Communist leader and
some 75,000 poorly equipped soldiers fled into the desolate mountains of
western China to escape Chiang K.ai—shek’s much larger army, in what has
since been called the Long March.
Chiang was determined to eliminate every last Communist, and by a
few years later Mao had less than 10,000 soldiers left. By 1937, in fact,
when China was invaded by japan, Chiang calculated that the Communists were no longer a threat. He chose to give up the chase and conceir
trate on the Japanese. Ten years later the Communists had recovered
enough to rout Chia.ng’s army. Chiang had forgotten the ancient wisdom of
crushing the enemy; Mao had not. Chiang was pursued until he and his entire army fled to the island of Taiwan. Nothing remains of his regime in
mainland China to this day.
The wisdom behind “crushing the enemy” is as ancient as the Bible:
Its first practitioner may have been Moses, who learned it from God Him«
self, when He parted the Red Sea for the Jews, then let the water {low back
over the pursuing Egyptians so that “not so much as one of them remained.” When Moses returned from Mount Sinai with the Ten Cornmandments and found his people worshipping the Golden Calf, he had
every last offender slaughtered. And just before he died, he told his followers, finally about to enter the Promised Land, that when they had defeated
the tribes of Canaan they should “utterly destroy them . . . make no
covenant with them, and show no mercy to them.”
The goal of total victory is an axiom of modern warfare, and was codified as such by Carl von Clausewitz, the premier philosopher of war. Ana»
lyzing the campaigns of Napoleon, von Clausewitz wrote, “We do claim
that direct annihilation of the enemy’s forces must always be the dominant
consideration. . . . Once a major victory is achieved there must be no talk of
rest, of breathing space . . . but only of the pursuit, going for the enemy
again, seizing his capital, attacking his reserves and anything else that
might give his country aid and comfort.” The reason for this is that afier
war some negotiation and the division of territory. If you have only won a
partial victory, you will inevitably lose in negotiation what you have
gained by war.
The solution is simple: Allow your enemies no options. Annihilate
them and their territory is yours to carve. The goal of power is to control
your enemies completely, to make them obey your will. You cannot afford
to go halfway. If they have no options, they will be forced to do your bidding. This law has applications far beyond the battlefield. Negotiation is the
insidious viper that will eat away at your victory, so give your enemies
nothing to negotiate, no hope, no room to maneuver. They are crushed
and that is that.
Realize this: In your struggle for power you will stir up rivalries and
create enemies. There will be people you cannot win over, who will re~
main your enemies no matter what. But whatever wound you inflicted on
them, deliberately or not, do not take their hatred personally. just recog»
nize that there is no possibility of peace between you, especially as long as
you stay in power. If you let them stick around, they will seek revenge, as
certainly as night follows day. To wait for them to show their cards is just
silly; as Empress Wu understood, by then it will be too late.
Be realistic: With an enemy like this around, you will never be secure.
Remember the lessons of history, and the wisdom of Moses and Mao:
Never go halfway.
It is not, of course, a question ofmurder, it is a question of banishment.
Sufficiently weakened and then exiled from your court forever, your enemies are rendered harmless. They have no hope ofrecovering, insinuating
themselves and hurting you. And if they cannot be banished, at least understand that they are plotting against you, and pay no heed to whatever
friendliness they feign. Your only weapon in such a situation is your own
war-iness. If you cannot banish them immediately, then plot for the best
time to act.
Image: A Viper crushed
beneath your foot but left
alive, will rear up and bite
you with a double dose of
venom. An enemy that is
left around is like a halfdeacl viper that you nurse
back to health. Time makes
the venom grow stronger.
Authority: For it must be
noted, that men must either be
caressed or else annihilated;
they will revenge themselves
for small injuries, but cannot
do so for great ones; the injury
therefore that we do to a man
must be such that we need not
fear his vengeance. {Niccolo
Machiavelli, 1469-1527}
LAW 15 ; 113
114 LAW 13
REVE RSAL
This law should very rarely be ignored, but it does sometimes happen that
it is better to let your enemies destroy themselves, if such a
thing is possible, than to make them suffer by your hand. In warfare, for example, a
good general knows that if he attacks an army when it is cornered, its soldiers will fight much more fiercely. It is sometimes better, then, to leave
them an escape route, a way out As they retreat, they wear themselves out,
and are ultimately more demoralized by the retreat than by any defeat he
might inflict on the battlefield. When you have someone on the ropes,
then——-but only when you are sure they have no chance of recovery--you
might let them hang themselves. Let them be the agents of their own destruction. The result will be the same, and you won‘t feel half as bad.
Finally, sometimes by crushing an enemy, you embitter them so much
that they spend years and years plotting revenge. The Treaty of Versailles
had such an effect on the Germans. Some would argue that in the long run
it would be better to show some leniency. The problem is, your leniency
involves another n'sk—it may embolden the enemy, which still harbors a
"
grudge, but now has some room to operate. It is almost always wiser to
crush your enemy. If they plot revenge years later, do not let your guard
down, but simply crush them again.
LAW
16
USE ABSENCE TO
INCREASE RESPECT
AND HONOR
UDGM ENT
Too much cirtulatémz makes the price go down: The more
you are seem and heardfmm, the more common you ap~
[Jean Ifyou are already established in a group, temporary
withdrawal from it will make you more talked about,
even mom admired. You must learn when to leave. Create value thmugh scarcity.
I15
'|‘l|l‘.lJ\\»ll.|. \\l)'l'l|ln
Fl l\\'|'I’\(. .\lt(IK*§
The firm man who MW
:1 (*an1cI_/lcrii
The .\'e¢:r1rnl vnnmred
wit/rm zlixtunw;
The third dared slip a
hnllm mum! il.\' hem}.
Fanxiliariiv in (his
ex1'5ten(,‘r3
.’l/h':I;e.\' ail’ lizingx tame.
for what may seen:
'12-rriixlv or bizarre.
lV][(’l'l IIIICC’ UHF’ fyffh
Have lmrl time lo
<:cz‘[z'nzr1¢i:.n.
Becomes quite
(,‘(lI1N7l()7l[7lLI(7(’. Since
I 'm rm mix thaym’,
I've lrczmi u_['.verx(im:I.r
]m.s'tml by the shore
Who, ,\ponin,g wmzv»
thing for-away a/(mu,
Crmlrln "I resist
the ximms
"A suiI!A sail!
A mighzy mar2—r:f~ war!"
Flive miim.-’es iaiur iris
H packet hoot,
And then u skiff; and
than (I link‘,
/lmlfinally some mcks
imbhing Izlmur.
I know o_fplmt_y' -\m':l:
7}) whom this rim)»
appliesPcople whom dirlcnrce
nmgmfies.
Who, (‘low 10, (Inn '1
amount IO much.
sral.I=,< rm) I-,«nl,r:s‘.
Jlww Ill‘, LA FUNIAINL
|t’)2l—l(a95
116 LAW 16
TRANSGRESSION AND OBSPLRVANCE OF THE LAW
Sir Guillaume de Balaun was a troubadour who roamed the South of
France in the Middle Ages, going from castle to castle, reciting poetry, and
playing the perfect knight. At the castle of javiac he met and fell in love
with the beautiful lady of the house, Madame Guillelma dejaviac. He sang
her his songs, recited his poetry, played chess with her, and little by little
she in turn fell in love with him. Guillaume had a friend, Sir Pierre de Bar
jac, who traveled with him and who was also received at the castle. And
Pierre too fell in love with a
lady in javiac, the gracious but temperamental
Viemetta.
Then one day Pierre and Viernetta had a violent quarrel. The lady
dismissed him, and he sought out his friend Guillaume to help heal the
breach and get him back in her good graces. Guillaume was about to leave
the castle for a while, but on his return, several weeks later, he worked his
magic, and Pierre and the lady were reconciled. Pierre felt that his love
had increased tenfold—that there was no stronger love, in fact, than the
love that follows reconciliation. The stronger and longer the disagreement,
he told Guillaume, the sweeter the feeling that comes with peace and
rapprochement,
As a troubadour, Sir Guillaume prided himself on experiencing all the
joys and sorrows of love. On hearing his friend's talk, he too wanted know
the bliss of reconciliation after a quarrel. He therefore feigned great anger
with Lady Guillelma, stopped sending her love letters. and abruptly left the
castle and stayed away, even during the festivals and hunts. This drove the
young lady wild.
Guillelma sent messengers to Guillaume to find out what bad hair»
pened, but he turned the messengers away. He thought all this would make
her angry, forcing him to plead for reconciliation as Pierre had. Instead,
however, his absence had the opposite effect: It made Guillelma love him
all the more. Now the lady pursued her knight, sending messengers and
love notes of her own. This was almost unheard of-—-a lady never pursued
her troubadour. And Guillaume did not like it. Guillelma’s forwardness
made him feel she had lost some of her dignity. Not only was he no longer
sure of his plan, he was no longer sure of his lady.
Finally, after several months of not hearing from Guillaume, Guillelma
gave up. She sent him no more messengers, and he began to wonder-perhaps she was angry? Perhaps the plan had worked after all? So much the
better if she was. He would wait no more.-it was time to reconcile. So he
put on his best robe, decked the horse in its fanciest caparison, chose a
magnificent helmet, and rode ofi" to javiac.
On hearing that her beloved had returned, Guillelma rushed to see
him, knelt before him, dropped her veil to kiss him, and begged forgiveness for whatever slight had caused his anger. Imagine his confusion and
despairw-his plan had failed abysmally. She was not angry, she had never
been angry, she was only deeper in love, and he would never experience
the joy of reconciliation after a quarrel. Seeing her now, and still desperate
to taste that joy, he decided to try one more time: He drove her away with
harsh words and threatening gestures. She left, this time vowing never to
see him again.
The next morning the troubadour regretted what he had done. He
rode back to javiac, but the lady would not receive him, and ordered her
servants to chase him away, across the drawbridge and over the hill. Guillaume fled. Back in his chamber he collapsed and started to cry: He had
made a terrible mistake. Over the next year, unable to see his lady, he experienced the absence, the terrible absence, that can only inflame love. He
wrote one of his most beautiful poems, “My song ascends for mercy praying.” And he sent many letters to Guillelma, explaining what he had done,
and begging forgiveness.
After a great deal of this, Lady Guillelma, remembering his beautiful
songs, his handsome figure, and his skills in dancing and falconry, found
herselfyearning to have him back. As penance for his cruelty, she ordered
him to remove the nail from the little finger of his right hand, and to send it
to her along with a
poem describing his miseries.
He did as she asked. Finally Guillaume de Balaun was able to taste the
ultimate sensation—-a reconciliation even surpassing that of his friend
Pierre.
Interpretation
Trying to discover the joys ofreconciliation, Guillaume de Balaun inadver—
tently experienced the truth of the law of absence and presence. At the
start of an affair, you need to heighten your presence in the eyes of the
other. If you absent yourself too early, you may be forgotten. But once
your lover‘s emotions are engaged, and the feeling of love has crystallized,
absence inflames and excites. Giving no reason for your absence excites
even more: The other person assumes he or she is at fault. While you are
away, the lover’s imagination takes flight, and a stimulated imagination
cannot help but make love grow stronger. Conversely, the more Guillelma
pursued Guillaume, the less he loved her—she had become too present,
too accessible, leaving no room for his imagination and fancy, so that his
feelings were suffocating. When she finally stopped sending messengers,
he was able to breathe again, and to return to his plan.
What withdraws, what becomes scarce, suddenly seems to deserve our
respect and honor. What stays too long, inundating us with its presence,
makes us disdain it. In the Middle Ages, ladies were constantly putting
their knights through trials of love, sending them on some long and arduous quest—-all to create a pattern of absence and presence. Indeed, had
Guillaume not left his lady in the first place, she might have been forced to
send him away, creating an absence of her own.
Absence diminishes minarrpassianr and inflame: great ones,
as the wind clauses a candle andfams aflre.
La Rot/wfo1u‘auId, 1P§I3-I680
I'M I‘ \|ll'll l',\' (Hl'Hl. z.<)<1k
lVhiIu .wr\'iIzg under
the Llulw flit:/'l.1(.
T'iz’II Jur), rlnwrllirzg his
obscure pnrimm, mid
to hir rrmslcr‘. “I am
goilzg tn wnmlz.-rfar
away like :1 M10141
goose,
“
“What do you Imnuzn by
llml?" inquired the
Duke.
"Do you see 111:’ trade? "
said 'l"ien ./an in reply.
“Its 5"/£5! is’ /2 symbol of
rivililyz its powerful
mlrms rzlggesl xlrmgtlz:
ilx (luring m fighr any
enemy zimz.~(e.r
cuura3ge,'i1.s 1m~Iim;I to
invite oIhcr.~: 5
fund is ubminczl shows
/r.-mevolenrz-;nru1. [ml
but not least, its p1mc—
rzmlily In keeping the
Iinte I/trough the nigh!
gives us an (tr/mtple of
wrarilxt In .s'[11't¢‘,
/mwcw’r. of v',h(¢Sf‘ five
virtmo, Ihe cock is duil_r
killed In,/ill a (lixla on
your table. Why? The
rwmalz is (hm 1'1 Ls‘
fnurzd within our rmrli.
On the other hzmrl. the
wow goose trovt'rrr5 in
zmefligiar (I Ilmmuml ii.
Re,vtir1g in your garden.
i1 ;>wy'.‘ an _vuur,ti.shu.v
am] Inr/(es and pm‘/t'_<
your mific»/. Tlmuglz
devoid ufany ofllzc
CrI1'k3 /in’ virzurls. yet
you prize I/nix‘ bird for
the silky nfm s~ca:'z'irv.
'I“lu’s bt'iug. . l.s'hal/fly
fur like a .\m/w game.
"
K(?llf?1>'(’J’
AN/.'ll‘N l’ I'lllt‘\F.'>l|-,
Iwmm
'
Yo Hsu. SLIV. H)”
1974
LAW 16 I17
118 LAW 16
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
For many centuries the Assyrians ruled upper Asia with an iron fist. In the
eighth century B.C., however, the people of Medea (now northwestern
Iran) revolted against them, and finally broke free. Now the Medes had to
establish a new government. Determined to avoid any form of despotism,
they refused to give ultimate power to any one man, or to establish a
monarchy. Without a leader, however, the country soon fell into chaos,
and fractured into small kingdoms, with village fighting against village.
In one such village lived a man named Deioces, who began to make a
name for himself for fair dealing and the ability to settle disputes.
He did this so successfully, in fact, that soon any legal conflict in the
area was brought to him, and his power increased. Throughout the land,
the law had fallen into disrepute-——the judges were corrupt, and no one entrusted their cases to the courts any more, resorting to violence instead.
When news spread of Deioces’ wisdom, incormptibility, and unshakable
impartiality, Medean villages far and wide turned to him to settle all manner of cases. Soon he became the sole arbiter ofjustice in the land.
At the height of his power, Deioces suddenly decided he had had
enough. He would no longer sit in the chair of judgment, would hear no
more suits, settle no more disputes between brother and brother, village
and village. Complaining that he was spending so much time dealing with
other people’s problems that he had neglected his own affairs, he retired.
The country once again descended into chaos. With the sudden withdrawal of a powerful arbiter like Deioces, crime increased, and contempt
for the law was never greater. The Medes held a meeting of all the villages
to decide how to get out of their predicament. “We cannot continue to live
in this country under these conditions,” said one tribal leader. “Let us appoint one of our number to rule so that we can live under orderly government, rather than losing our homes altogether in the present chaos.”
And so, despite all that the Medes had suffered under the Assyrian despotism, they decided to set up a monarchy and name a king. And the man
they most wanted to rule, of course, was the fair-minded Deioces. He was
hard to convince, for he wanted nothing more to do with the villages’ infighting and bickering, but the Medes begged and pleaded—without him the
country had descended into a state of lawlessness. Deioces finally agreed.
Yet he also imposed conditions. An enormous palace was to be constructed for him, he was to be provided with bodyguards, and a
capital city
was to be built from which he could rule. All of this was done, and Deioces
settled into his palace. In the center of the capital, the palace was surrounded by walls, and completely inaccessible to ordinary people. Deioces
then established the terms of his rule: Admission to his presence was forbidden. Communication with the king was only possible through messengers. No one in the royal court could see him more than once a week, and
then only by permission.
Deioces ruled for fifty—three years, extended the Medean empire, and
established the foundation for what would later be the Persian empire,
under his great—great—grandson Cyrus. During Deioces’ reign, the people’s
respect for him gradually turned into a form ofworship: He was not a mere
mortal, they believed, but the son of a god.
Interpretation
Deioces was a man of great ambition. He determined early on that the
country needed a
strong ruler, and that he was the man for the job.
ln a land plagued with anarchy, the most powerful man is the judge
and arbiter. So Deioces began his career by making his reputation as a man
of impeccable fairness.
At the height of his power as a
judge, however, Deioces realized the
truth of the law of absence and presence: By serving so many clients, he
had become too noticeable, too available, and had lost the respect he had
earlier enjoyed. People were taking his services for granted. The only way
to regain the veneration and power he wanted was to withdraw completely, and let the Medes taste what life was like without him. As he expected, they came begging for him to rule.
Once Deioces had discovered the truth of this law, he carried it to its
ultimate realization. In the palace his people had built for him, none could
see him except a few courtiers, and those only rarely. As Herodotus wrote,
“There was a risk that if they saw him habitually, it might lead to jealousy
and resentment, and plots would follow; but ifnobody saw him, the legend
would grow that he was a being of a different order from more men.”
A man said to a Dervish.‘ “Why do Inot see you mm ofim?" The Dervish
replied, “Because the words ‘Why have you not been to see me?’ are
sweeter to my ear than the words ‘Why have you come again .9’ ”
Mnlllofami. quoted in [dries S./uzh '5 (Jaravan of I)remns_. 1.968
KEYS TO POWER
Everything in the world depends on absence and presence. A strong presence will draw power and attention to you—you shine more brightly than
those around you. But a point is inevitably reached where too much presence creates the opposite effect: The more you are seen and heard from,
the more your value degrades. You become a habit. No matter how hard
you try to be different, subtly, without your knowing why. people respect
you less and less. At the right moment you must leam to withdraw yourself
before they unconsciously push you away. It is a
game of hide—and~seek.
The truth of this law can most easily be appreciated in matters of love
and seduction. In the beginning stages of an affair, the 1over‘s absence stimulates your imagination, forming a sort of aura around him or her. But this
aura fades when you know too much--~when your imagination no longer
has room to roam. The loved one becomes a
person like anyone else, a
person whose presence is taken for granted. This is why the seventeenthcentury French courtesan Ninon de Lenclos advised constant feints at with
drawal from one’s lover. “Love never dies of starvation,” she wrote, “but
often of indigestion.”
LAW 16 . 119
120 LAW 16
The moment you allow yourself to be treated like anyone else, it is too
late--you are swallowed and digested To prevent this you need to starve
the other poison of your presence. Force their respect by threatening them
with the possibility that they will lose you for good; create a pattern ofpresence and absence.
Once you die, everything about you will seem different. You will be
surrounded by an instant aura ofrespect. People will remember their criti~
cisms of you, their arguments with you, and will be filled with regret and
guilt. They are missing a
presence that will never return. But you do not
have to wait until you die: By completely withdrawing for a while, you create a kind of death before death. And when you come back, it will be as if
you had come back from the dead--an air ofresuirection will cling to you,
and people will be relieved at your return. This is how Deioces made him~
self king.
Napoleon was recognizing the law of absence and presence when he
said, “If I am often seen at the theater, people will cease to notice me.”
Today, in a world inundated with presence through the flood of images, the
game of withdrawal is all the more powerful. We rarely know when to
withdraw anymore, and nothing seems private, so we are awed by anyone
who is able to disappear by choice. Novelists J. D. Salinger and Thomas
Pynchon have created cultlike followings by knowing when to disappear.
Another, more everyday side of this law, but one that demonstrates
its truth even further, is the law of scarcity in the science of economics.
By withdrawing something from the market, you create instant value. In
seventeenth-century Holland, the upper classes wanted to make the tulip
more than just a beautiful flower——they wanted it to be a kind of status sym~
bol. Making the flower scarce, indeed almost impossible to obtain, they
sparked what was later called tulipomania. A single flower was now worth
more than its weight in gold. In our own century, similarly, the art dealer
Joseph Duveen insisted on making the paintings he sold as scarce and rare
as possible. To keep their prices elevated and their statushigh, he bought up
whole collections and stored them in his basement. The paintings that he
sold became more than just paintings-—t.hey were fetish objects, their value
increased by their rarity. “You can get all the pictures you want at fifty thousand dollars apiece~—-that’s easy,” he once said. “But to get pictures at a
quarter of amillion apiece—that wants doing!”
I In a
g
e:
The Sun. It can only be
appreciated by its absence.
The longer the days of rain, the
more the sun is craved. But too many
hot days and the sun overwhelms.
Learn to keep yourself obscure and
make people demand your return
Extend the law of scarcity to your own skills. Make what you are offering the world rare and hard to find, and you instantly increase its value.
There always comes a moment when those in power overstay their
welcome. We have grown tired of them, lost respect for them; we see them
as no different from the rest of mankind, which is to say that we see them as
rather worse, since we inevitably compare their current status in our eyes
to their former one. There is an art to knowing when to retire. If it is done
right, you regain the respect you had lost, and retain a part of your power.
The greatest ruler of the sixteenth century was Charles V. King of
Spain, Hapsburg emperor, he governed an empire that at one point inclucled much ofEurope and the New World. Yet at the height of his power,
in 1557, he retired to the monastery of Yuste. All ofEurope was captivated
by his sudden withdrawal; people who had hated anti feared him suddenly
called him great, and he came to be seen as a saint. In more recent times,
the film actress Greta Garbo was never more admired than when she re
tired, in 1941, For some her absence came too soon—sl1e was in her midthirties—but she wisely preferred to leave on her own terms, rather than
waiting for her audience to grow tired of her.
Make yourself too available and the aura of power you have created
around yourself will wear away. Turn the game around: Make yourself less
accessible and you increase the value of your presence.
Authority:
Use absence to create
respect and esteem. If presence
diminishes fame, absence augments it.
A man who when absent is regarded as a
lion becomes when present something common and ridiculous. Talents lose their luster
if we become too familiar with them, for the
outer shell of the mind is more readily seen
than its rich inner kernel. Even the outstand«
ing genius makes use of retirement so that
men may honor him and so that the
yearning aroused by his absence
may cause him to be esteemed.
(Baltasar Grecian,
l60lvl658)
LAW 16 I21
REVERSAL
This law only applies once a certain level of power has been attained. The
need to withdraw only comes after you have established your presence;
leave too early and you do not increase your respect, you are simply forgotten. When you are first entering onto the world’: stage, create an image
that is recognizable, reproducible, and is seen everywhere. Until that status
is attained, absence is dangerous—instead of farming the flames, it will extinguish them.
In love and seduction, similarly, absence is only effective once you
have surrounded the other with your image, been seen by him or her
everywhere. Everything must remind your lover of your presence, so that
when you do choose to be away, the lover will always be thinking of you,
will always be seeing you in his or her mind’s eye.
Remember: In the beginning, make yourself not scarce but omnipresent. Only what is seen, appreciated, and loved will be missed in its
absence.
17
KEEP OTHERS IN
SUSPENDED TERROR:
CULTIVATE AN AIR OF
UNPREDICTABILITY
_]UDGMENT
Humans are creatures ofhabit with an insatiabte need to
seefamiliarity in otherpeople’s actions. Y<mrpredictabz‘l—
it)‘ gives them a sense qf contml. Tum ike tables: Be deliberately unparedictable. Behavior film: seems to have no
consistency or purpose will keqb them ofiibalkznce, and
they will wear themselves out flying tn explaiez your
moves‘ Yhken to an extnefine, this straiegy can intimidate
and mmrize.
I23
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
In May of 1972, chess champion Boris Spassky anxiously awaited his rival
Bobby Fischer in Reylqavik, Iceland. The two men had been scheduled to
meet for the World Championship of Chess, but Fischer had not arrived on
time and the match was on hold. Fischer had problems with the size of the
prize money, problems with the way the money was to be distributed,
problems with the logistics of holding the match in Iceland. He might back
out at any moment.
Spassky tried to be patient. His Russian bosses felt that Fischer was hu—
miliating him and told him to walk away, but Spassky wanted this match.
He knew he could destroy Fischer, and nothing was going to spoil the
greatest victory of his career. “So it seems that all our work may come to
nothing,” Spassky told a comrade. “But what can we do? It is Bobby’s
move. If he comes, we play. If he does not come; we do not play. A man
who is willing to commit suicide has the initiative.”
Fischer finally arrived in Reykjavik, but the problems, and the threat
of cancellation, continued. He disliked the hall where the match was to be
fought, he criticized the lighting, he complained about the noise of the
cameras, he even hated the chairs in which he and Spassky were to sit
Now the Soviet Union took the initiative and threatened to withdraw their
man.
The bluff apparently worked: After all the weeks of waiting, the endless and infuriating negotiations, Fischer agreed to play. Everyone was relieved, no one more than Spassky. But on the day of the ofiicial
introductions, Fischer arrived very late, and on the day when the “Match
of the Century” was to begin, he was late again. This fime, however, the
consequences would be dire: If he showed up too late he would forfeit the
first game. What was going on? Was he playing some sort of mind game?
Or was Bobby Fischer perhaps afraid ofBoris Spassky? It seemed to the assembled grand masters, and to Spassky, that this young kid from Brooklyn
had a terrible case of the jitters. At 5:09 Fischer showed up, exactly one
minute before the match was to be canceled.
The first game of a chess tournament is critical, since it sets the tone for
the months to come. It is often a slow and quiet struggle, with the two players preparing themselves for the war and trying to read each other’s strategies. This game was different. Fischer made a terrible move early on,
perhaps the worst of his career, and when Spassky had him on the ropes,
he seemed to give up. Yet Spassky knew that Fischer never gave up. Even
when facing checkmate, he fought to the bitter end, wearing the opponent
down. This time, though, he seemed resigned. Then suddenly he broke out
a bold move that put the room in a buzz. The move shocked Spassky, but
he recovered and managed to win the game. But no one could figure out
what Fischer was up to. Had he lost deliberately? Or was he rattled? Unsettled? Even, as some thought, insane?
After his defeat in the first game, Fischer complained all the more
loudly about the room, the cameras, and everything else. He also failed to
show up on time for the second game. This time the organizers had had
enough: He was given a forfeit. Now he was down two games to none, at
position from which no one had ever come back to win a chess championship. Fischer was clearly unhinged. Yet in the third game, as all those
who witnessed it remember, he had a ferocious look in his eye, a look that
clearly bothered Spassky. And despite the hole he had dug for himself, he
seemed supremely confident. He did make what appeared to be another
blunder, as he had in the first game—but his cocky air made Spassky smell
a
trap. Yet despite the Russian’s suspicions, he could not figure out the trap,
and before he knew it Fischer had checkmated him. In fact Fischer’s un—
orthodox tactics had completely unnerved his opponent. At the end of the
game, Fischer leaped up and rushed out, yelling to his confederates as he
smashed a list into his palm, “I’m crushing him with brute force!”
In the next games Fischer pulled moves that no one had seen from
him before, moves that were not his style. Now Spassky started to make
blunders. After losing the sixth game, he started to cry. One grand master
said, “After this, Spassky’s got to ask himself if it’s safe to go back to Russia." After the eighth game Spassky decided he knew what was happening:
Bobby Fischer was hypnotizing him. He decided not to look Fischer in the
eye; he lost anyway.
After the fourteenth game he called a staff conference and announced,
“An attempt is being made to control my mind.” He wondered whether the
orange juice they drank at the chess table could have been drugged.
Maybe chemicals were being blown into the air. Finally Spassky went pub—
lic, accusing the Fischer team of putting something in the chairs that was a1»
tering Spassky’s mind. The KGB went on alert: Boris Spassky was
embarrassing the Soviet Union!
The chairs were taken apart and X—rayed. A chemist found nothing
unusual in them. The only things anyone found anywhere, in fact, were
two dead flies in a
lighting fixture. Spassky began to complain of hallucinations. He tried to keep playdng, but his mind was unraveling. He could not
go on. On September 2, he resigned. Although still relatively young, he
never recovered from this defeat.
Interpretation
In previous games between Fischer and Spassky, Fischer had not fared
well. Spassky had an uncanny ability to read his opponent’s strategy and
use it against him. Adaptable and patient, he would build attacks that would
defeat not in seven moves but in seventy. He defeated Fischer every time
they played because he saw much further ahead, and because he was a brilliant psychologist who never lost control. One master said, “He doesn’tjust
look for the best move. He looks for the move that will disturb the man he
is playing.”
Fischer, however, finally understood that this was one of the keys to
Spassky’s success: He played on your predictability, defeated you at your
own game. Everything Fischer did for the championship match was an atLAW 17 125
I26 LAW 17
tempt to put the initiative on his side and to keep Spassl-Ly offibalance.
Clearly the endless waiting had an effect on Spassky’s psyche. Most powerful of all, though, were Fischer’s deliberate blunders and his appearance of
having no clear strategy. In fact, he was doing everything he could to
scramble his old patterns, even if it meant losing the first match and forfeiting the second.
Spassky was known for his sangfroid and levelheadedness, but for the
first time in his life he could not figure out his opponent. He slowly melted
down, until at the end he was the one who seemed insane.
Chess contains the concentrated essence of life: First, because to win
you have to be supremely patient and farseeing; and second, because the
game is built on patterns, whole sequences of moves that have been played
before and will be played again, with slight alterations, in any one match
Your opponent analyzes the patterns you are playing and uses them to try
to foresee your moves. Allowing him nothing predictable to base his strategy on gives you a big advantage. In chess as in life, when people cannot
figure out what you are doing, they are kept in a state of terror—waiting,
uncertain, confused,
Life at court is a serious, melancholy game of chess, which requires us to draw
up ourpieces and batteries, form a plan, pursue it, parry that of our
adversary. Sometimes, however, it is better to take risks
and play the most capricious, unpredictable mave.
lean (1rI.a Bruyéw, I/545-1696
KEYS TO POWER
Nothing is more terrifying than the sudden and unpredictable. That is why
we are so frightened by earthquakes and tornadoes: We do not know when
they will strike. Alter one has occurred, we wait in terror for the next one.
To a lesser degree, this is the effect that unpredictable human behavior has
on us.
Animals behave in set patterns, which is why we are able to hunt and
kill them. Only man has the capacity to consciously alter his behavior, to
improvise and overcome the weight of routine and habit. Yet most men do
not realize this power. They prefer the comforts of routine, of giving in to
the animal nature that has them repeating the same compulsive actions
time and time again. They do this because it requires no effort, and because they mistakenly believe that if they do not unsettle others, they will
be left alone. Understand: A person of power instills a kind of fear by deliberately unsettling those around him to keep the initiative on his side. You
sometimes need to strike without waming, to make others tremble when
they least expect it. It is a device that the powerful have used for centuries.
Filippo Maria, the last of the Visconti dukes of Milan in fifteenth»
century Italy, consciously did the opposite of what everyone expected of
him. For instance, he might suddenly shower a courtier with attention, and
then, once the man had come to expect a promotion to higher office,
would suddenly start treating him with the utmost disdain. Confused, the
man might leave the court, when the duke would suddenly recall him and
start treating him well again. Doubly confused, the courtier would wonder
whether his assumption that he would be promoted had become obvious,
and offensive, to the duke, and would start to behave as if he no longer expected such honor. The duke would rebuke him for his lack of ambition
and would send him away.
The secret of dealing with Filippo was simple: Do not presume to
know what he wants. Do not try to guess what will please him. Never inject
your will; just surrender to his will. Then wait to see what happens. Amidst
the confusion and uncertainty he created, the duke ruled supreme, unchallenged and at peace.
Unpredictability is most often the tactic of the master, but the underdog too can use it to great effect. If you find yourself outnumbered or cornered, throw in a series of unpredictable moves. Your enemies will be so
confused that they will pull back or make a tactical blunder.
In the spring of 1862, during the American Civil War, General
Stonewall Jackson and a force of 4,600 Confederate soldiers were torment»
ing the larger Union forces in the Shenandoah Valley. Meanwhile, not far
away, General George Brinton McClellan, heading a force of 90,000
Union soldiers, was marching south from Washington, D.C., to lay siege to
Richmond, Virginia, the Confederate capital, As the weeks of the campaign went by, Jackson repeatedly led his soldiers out of the Shenandoah
Valley, then back to it.
His movements made no sense. Was he preparing to help defend
Richmond? Was he marching on Washington, now that McClellan’s absence had left it unprotected? Was be heading north to wreak havoc up
there? Why was his small force moving in circles?
Jacksorfs inexplicable moves made the Union generals delay the
march on Richmond as they waited to figure out what he was up to. Meanwhile, the South was able to pour reinforcements into the town. A battle
that could have crushed the Confederacy turned into a stalemate. Jackson
used this tactic time and again when facing numerically superior forces.
“Always mystify, mislead, and surprise the enemy, if possible,” he said,
“. . . such tactics will win every time and a small army may thus destroy a
large ones”
This law applies not only to war but to everyday situations. People are
always trying to read the motives behind your actions and to use your pre«
dictability against you. Throw in at completely inexplicable move and you
put them on the defensive. Because they do not understand you, they are
unnerved, and in such a state you can easily intimidate them.
Pablo Picasso once remarked, “The best calculation is the absence of
calculation. Once you have attained a certain level of recognition, others
generally figure that when you do something, it’s for an intelligent reason.
So it’s really foolish to plot out your movements too carefully in advance.
You’re better off acting capriciously.”
For a while, Picasso worked with the ait dealer Paul Rosenberg. At first
LAW 17 127
128 LAW 17
he allowed him a fair amount of latitude in handling his paintings, then one
day, for no apparent reason, he told the man he would no longer give him
any work to sell. As Picasso explained, “Rosenberg would spend the next
forty-eight hours trying to figure out why. Was I
reserving things for some
other dealer? I’d go on working and sleeping and Rosenberg would spend
his time figuring. In two days he’d come back, nerves jangled, anxious, say»
ing, ‘After all, dear friend, you wouldn’t turn me down if I offered you this
much [naming a substantially higher figure] for those paintings rather than
the price Pve been accustomed to paying you, would you?’ ”
Unpredictability is not only a weapon of terror: Scrambling your patterns on a day-to-day basis will cause a stir around you and stimulate intet—
est. People will talk about you, ascribe motives and explanations that have
nothing to do with the truth, but that keep you constantly in their minds. In
the end, the more capricious you appear, the more respect you will garner.
Only the terminally subordinate act in a predictable manner.
Image: The Cyclone. A
wind that cannot be foreseen. Sudden shifts in
the barometer, in—
explicable changes
in direction and
velocity. There is
no defense: A
cyclone sows
terror and
confusion.
Authority: The enlightened ruler is so mysterious that he seems
to dwell nowhere, so inexplicable that no one can seek him.
He repose-s in nonaction above, and his ministers tremble
below. (Han-fei-tzu, Chinese philosopher, third century B.C.)
REVERSAL
Sometimes predictability can work in your favor: By creating a pattern for
people to be familiar and comfortable with, you can lull them to sleep.
They have prepared everything according to their preconceived notions
about you. You can use this in several ways: First, it sets up a smoke screen,
a comfortable front behind which you can carry on deceptive actions. Sec
ond, it allows you on rare occasions to do something completely against
the pattern, unsettling your opponent so deeply he will fall to the ground
without being pushed.
In 1974 Muhammad Ali and George Foreman were scheduled to fight
for the world heavyweight boxing championship. Everyone knew what
would happen: Big George Foreman would try to land a knockout punch
while Ali would dance around him, wearing him out. That was Ali’s way of
fighting, his pattern, and he had not changed it in more than ten years. But
in this case it seemed to give Foreman the advantage: He had a devastating
punch, and if he waited, sooner or later Ali would have to come to him.
Ali, the master strategist, had other plans: In press conferences before the
big fight, he said he was going to change his style and punch it out with
Foreman. No one, least of all Foreman, believed this for a second. That
plan would be suicide on Ali’s part; he was playing the comedian, as usual.
Then, before the fight, Ali’s trainer loosened the ropes around the ring,
something a trainer would do if his boxer were intending to slug it out. But
no one believed this play; it had to be a setup.
To everyone’s amazement, Ali did exactly what he had said he would
do. As Foreman waited for him to dance around, Ali went right up to him
and slugged it out. He completely upset his opponent’s strategy. At a loss,
Foreman ended up wearing himself out, not by chasing Ali but by throwing punches wildly, and taking more and more counterpunches. Finally,
Ali landed a dramatic right cross that knocked out Foreman. The habit of
assuming that a person’s behavior will fit its previous patterns is so strong
that not even Ali’s announcement of a strategy change was enough to upset
it. Foreman walked into a
trap-«the trap he had been told to expect.
A warning: Unpredictability can work against you sometimes, es
pecially if you are in a subordinate position. There are times when it is bet
ter to let people feel comfortable and settled around you than to disturb
thern. Too much unpredictability will be seen as a
sign of indecisiveness, or
even of some more serious psychic problem. Rattems are powerful, and
you can terrify people by disrupting them. Such power should only be
used judiciously.
LAW I7 129
130
18
DO NOT BUILD FORTRESSES
TO PROTECT YOURSELFISOLATION IS DANGEROUS
_]UI)GM ENT
The world is dangerous and enemies am everywhere-—
everyone has to protect themselves. A fowrms seems the
safest. But isolation exposes you to mom dangers than it
protects youfmm——-it cuts you ojj‘from valuable information, it makes you conspicuous and an easy target. Better
to cirrulate among people, find allies, mingle. You are
shieldedfrom your enemies by the crowd.
TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAVV
Ch’in Shih Huang Ti, the first emperor of China (221-210 B.C.), was the
mightiest man of his day. His empire was vaster and more powerful than
that of Alexander the Great. He had conquered all of the kingdoms surrounding his own kingdom of Chin and unified them into one massive
realm called China. But in the last years ofhis life, few, if anyone, saw him.
The emperor lived in the most magnificent palace built to that date, in
the capital of Hsien-yang. The palace had 270 pavilions; all of these were
connected by secret underground passageways, allowing the emperor to
move through the palace without anyone seeing him. He slept in a differ-—
ent room every night, and anyone who inadvertently laid eyes on him was
instantly beheaded. Only a handful of men knew his whereabouts, and if
they revealed it to anyone, they, too, were put to death.
The first emperor had grown so terrified of human Contact that when
he had to leave the palace he traveled incognito, disguising himself care
fully. On one such trip through the provinces, he suddenly died. His body
was borne back to the capital in the emperor’s carriage, with a cart packed
with salted fish trailing behind it to cover up the smell of the rotting
corpse-—~no one was to know of his death. He died alone, far from his
wives, his family, his friends, and his courfiers, accompanied only by a
minister and a handful of eunuchs.
Interpretation
Shih Huang Ti started off as the king of Ch’in, a fearless warrior of unbridled ambition. Writers of the time described him as a man with “a waspish
nose, eyes like slits, the voice of a
jackal, and the heart of a
tiger or wolf.”
He could be merciful sometimes, but more often he “swallowed men up
without a scruple.” It was through trickery and violence that he conquered
the provinces surrounding his own and created China, forging a single nation and culture out of many. He broke up the feudal system, and to keep
an eye on the many members of the royal families that were scattered
across the realm’s various kingdoms, he moved 120,000 of them to the capital, where he housed the most important couxtiers in the vast palace of
Hsienyang. He consolidated the many walls on the borders and built them
into the Great Wall of China. He standardized the country’s laws, its written language, even the size of its cartwheels.
As part of this process of unification, however, the first emperor outlawed the writings and teachings of Confucius, the philosopher whose
ideas on the moral life had already become virtually a
religion in Chinese
culture. On Shih Huang Ti’s order, thousands of books relating to Confucius were burned, and anyone who quoted Confucius was to be beheaded.
This made many enemies for the emperor, and he grew constantly afraid,
even paranoid. The executions mounted. A contemporary, the writer Hanfei-tzu, noted that “Ch’in has been victorious for four generations, yet has
lived in constant terror and apprehension of destruction.”
As the emperor withdrew deeper and deeper into the palace to protect
'l HI. \lr\~t)l l-l. HI l'||l‘.
HM) I)! \l H
The “Ra! DcuII1"lmrl
long dew1.sl(:twl the
ummry. No pi=.\‘lIIenr:>
lluzl (Iver/1¢‘t?r1 .
final,
or so /u':Iemi.>‘, Blood
was LIA‘ A vnmr and its
weal-—~Ilrermi:1i:.v, mt
/mrmy of Inhorl. 7h€rc'
Wflfl‘ sharp palms; and
smldmz rlizzirmsxs‘, and
than pro/"lure hluetlirzg
at the pores, with
dix.ioluIu,m .Aiut
thy w/mic seizure.
[)1"(7gIf.‘SA', and termiuzr
mm 0
f
the d1'.s'c'a.\'c. were
[he iIz(‘i(l(mr.i' nfhulfau
hour.
Bur the Prim:r* Proxpero was Iznppy and
L/£tIU1Il(‘\‘S and mgzzv
cirms. When his’ dominians were half‘
ilefmjzulnled, Iw
Surnrnuned In his
pmtr-,nc7c u tlizmxuml
lmlr and Ii;:ht»Immi'd
_/'rzrmrIx from («mung the
koziglzrr and tlturwr of
/zir court, and with
iliese retired (0 the (leap
su'i'im‘rm o_,"mzc nfhis
t‘{L\'f{’//Ilffll (II)/JE’y,3. This
Win an ex’/t»nsiw 4/ml
rnagnificewt s(rm.'tnre'.
1/21,’ <'r(ratir2rc 17] the
prince 3' own ¢u':"e'ItIrir
yet Lmgmt law. A
strong and lofty wall
girdlezl it in. Tim wall
/wt} gtll£‘.8' ofirmz. The
4 ounier.-;, having
marred. lmnzglti
fu/nm.'e.x' and nm.s'.vv
lmmmc-r.\* um.‘ weltlurl
the boltx. 'I'he'y resolved
to leave tnmms‘ mirlirr
ufingrlasis imr 4'grz>.s:< to
(/10 sudrlmz iI17[ml.\'(*.s of
<lc.vpuir or 0j‘from:y
from It izlzin. Tlzu
abbey was amply
prowsiolzccl. Willi s'm:h
LAW is 131
prr~i:uuIim1.s thr4'rmmers migh! bid
dr7_fimzr;v IO mnlagiorz.
'1 71¢‘ L’.Xl€‘W1tl[ world
zruuld take care: of
itself In (/16 mmntirize
It was [ally to gri(!Vd.
or to ririrtk. The pritlue‘
liu1fpr0w'dea' all rlw
apgrlamiws rtfpieasalre.
Tit!-‘IL’ were bllffaorls,
1/zen‘ were impm~
visrtrori. Iherr wen’
[2t1ll€‘l-lI\!W(‘W'), there
were mzi.\'i<rz'r1Iz.s', their
was Bmuly, tlwre was
wine. All lll(!.$'(3£ll1d
.\(‘L‘l.U‘lIV were within.
Without was the
“Red [)e',aIh.”
It was toward the close
of rho fifth /tr yixrh
momfr oflris swlusirm,
and while (hr pr-srilcrrrer
mgr-ii most furiously
ahmrm’, thin the Prince
[’r().s’pem emcrminerl
his Ilmumnzl friemlr at
Ll muskzezl hull of the
must unusmal magnificence. /I was a volupuumr .ST.‘(’Il€’, (hut
ma.\‘qm:rade. . . .
. . ./lnd rim revel want
wlziriingly on, mm"! m
/cngtix {ht-re rommmlrerl the vmmding
of midnight upon thv
clock. . . ,And’ thus‘ (00,
it lzappmzed, perhaps,
lhm before the last
t14:i1<ms' ofthe last rhmw
/wd utterly sunk into
silmite, them were
many /'mlividual.s' in the
crowd who had found
Ieisurr 10 becmru’
aware of the prresrcmuz
of u musket! [igure
wlrirh had dN'(’.$‘FL'fl I110
mtemion ofm) single
imIivit£zmI' before. . .
Hie figure was tall and
gaunt, and shrouded
from ham] to fool in
thc l1ubiIinu'nts' of the
gmve. Th(’Im1.\‘k which
concralrd YIN,‘ visage
I32 LAW I8
himself, he slowly lost control of the realm. Eunuchs and ministers enacted
political policies without his approval or even his knowledge; they also
plotted against him. By the end, he was emperor in name only, and was so
isolated that barely anyone knew he had died. He had probably been poisoned by the same scheming ministers who encouraged his isolation.
That is what isolation brings: Retreat into a. fortress and you lose contact with the sources of your power. You lose your ear for what is happening around you, as well as a sense ofproportion. Instead ofbeing safer, you
cut yourself off from the kind of knowledge on which your life depends.
Never enclose yourself so far from the streets that you cannot hear what is
happening around you, including the plots against you.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
Louis XIV had the palace of Versailles built for him and his court in the
16605, and it was like no other royal palace in the world. As in El, beehive,
everything revolved around the royal person. He lived surrounded by the
nobility, who were allotted apartments nestled around his, their closeness
to him dependent on their rank. The kings bedroom occupied the literal
center of the palace and was the focus of everyone’s attention. Every mom~
ing the king was greeted in this room by a ritual known as the lever.
At eight A.M., the king's first valet, who slept at the foot of the royal
bed, would awaken His Majesty. Then pages would open the door and
admit those who had a. function in the lever. The order of their entry was
precise: First came the king’s illegitimate sons and his grandchildren, then
the princes and princesses of the blood, and then his physician and surgeon. There followed the grand ollicers of the wardrobe, the king’s oflicial
reader, and those in charge of entertaining the king‘ Next would arrive various government officials. in ascending order of rank. Last but not least
came those attending the [ever by special invitation. By the end of the cere»
many, the room would be packed with well over a hundred royal atten»
dams and visitors.
The day was organized so that all the palace’s energy was directed at
and passed through the king. Louis was constantly attended by courtiers
and officials, all asking for his advice and judgment. To all their questions
he usually replied, “I shall see.”
As Saint-Simon noted, “If he turned to someone, asked him a
question, made an insignificant remark, the eyes of all present were turned on
this person. It was a distinction that was talked of and increased prestige.”
There was no possibility of privacy in the palace, not even for the kingevery room communicated with another, and every hallway led to larger
rooms where groups of nobles gathered constantly. Everyone’s actions
were interdependent, and nothing and no one passed unnoticed: “The
king not only saw to it that all the high nobility was present at his court,”
wrote Saint—Simon, “he demanded the same of the minor nobility. At his
lever and voucher, at his meals, in his gardens ofVersailles, he always looked
about him, noticing everything. He was offended if the most distinguished
nobles did not live permanently at court, and those who showed themselves never or hardly ever, incurred his full displeasure. If one of these de
sired something, the king would say proudly: ‘I do not know him,’ and the
judgment was irrevocable.”
Interpretation
Louis XIV came to power at the end of a terrible civil war, the Fronde. A
principal instigator ofthe war had been the nobility, which deeply resented
the growing power of the throne and yearned for the days of feudalism,
when the lords ruled their own fiefdoms and the king had little authority
over them. The nobles had lost the civil war, but they remained a fractious,
resentful lot.
The construction of Versailles, then, was far more than the decadent
whim of a
luxury—1oving king. It served a crucial function: The king could
keep an eye and an ear on everyone and everything around him. The
once proud nobility was reduced to squabbling over the right to help the
king put on his robes in the morning. There was no possibility here of pm?
vacy--no possibility of isolation. Louis XIV very early grasped the truth
that for a king to isolate himself is gravely dangerous. In his absence, conspiracies will spring up like mushrooms after rain, animosities will crystallize into factions, and rebellion will break out before he has the time to
react. To combat this, sociability and openness must not only be encouraged, they must be formally organized and channeled.
These conditions at Versailles lasted for Louis’s entire reign, some fifty
years of relative peace and tranquillity. Through it all, not a pin dropped
without Louis hearing it.
Solitude is dangerous to reason, without beingfavorable to virtue. . . .
Remember that the solitary mortal is certainly luxurious,
probabhv superstitious, and possibly mad.
Dr. Sanmeljolirism, l 709m} 784
KEYS TO POWER
Machiavelli makes the argument that in a
strictly military sense a fortress is
invariably a mistake. It becomes a symbol of power's isolation, and is an
easy target for its builders’ enemies. Designed to defend you, fortresses ac—
tually cut you off from help and cut into your flexibility. They may appear
impregnable, but once you retire to one, everyone knows where you are;
and a siege does not have to succeed to turn your fortress into a prison.
With their small and confined spaces, fortresses are also extremely vulnerv
able to the plague and contagious diseases, In a strategic sense, the isolation of a fortress provides no protection, and actually creates more
problems than it solves.
war made so mmrly m
l'fi,\‘('inl7lf,’ I/M mimicmxmr of 1.1 .vlE_/V/nrwd
corpse Ilml llit' (‘Ins-in.-z
scrutiny mm‘! have lzzm’
clifficulzy in (lowering
{he cheat. A ml “wt all
this might have l)(’L’Il
endured, ifmrt
ap]1I'I)v('(l, by the mod
rave/l<>r.\' amuml. But
the mummer had gone
so for as to u.s'.s‘ume the
type afzlze Rm! llmth,
His v:'.\'mr1’ Wm‘
rlahlrlml in blood-» am!
lll.\' brourl blow, with all
the ['94:/um»: of the face,
wuX.x']1riIIklt?til with the
scarlet lwrmr. . ..
, . . A throng ufzlze
f'i3I'¢llt.'I‘é at once /hrew
tin-imelve: mm rlw
black apartment, and,
wizittg the mummer,
wlzoxe ml! figure A‘l()0£l
erect and !7llllll)I'll(’.l.)'
within the shadow of
the ebony rtlmtk, gaspezl
m mmltrzra/711' lmrror ul
finding the grave cert»
mean and ¢torp.i‘e-/ilcx‘
mark, Wl2IClI they
handled with so violmt
a l’(l(,l(,‘Pl(f.\',S'. mitt-nunwd
by any tangible form.
And now was mtI<m2wledged the prrnwrzzrt: of
the RM D:-am. I14-lmd
r‘{)t.Vl£’ like 11 Iliirafin the
izigltl, And one by one
dropped the revellers in
the bl47od~herlmver1
halls I)flll-‘fl!’ rm/pl, and
dim} mrrlx in (ho
rlespmrirzg po.v1ur<I of
his [all And the life of
Ill? e'l:on_>.* (‘lurk wen!
out with that ofrlvc last
ofthe gay. And the
flames ofihe tripods
ccxpirezl. Am! Darl<rlc:'.s
and llecay and the Red
Death held lllimimhlc
rlnnzinimz (Iver all.
'itll-' MAsoI1I«,0l«"1‘m»,
RED nr,A1'u.
EDGAR ALL.-\N Pm;
3809-1849
LAW 18 I32)’
l34 LAW 18
Because humans are social creatures by nature, power depends on social interaction and circulation. To make yourself powerful you must place
yourself at the center of things, as Louis XIV did at Versailles. All activity
should revolve around you, and you should be aware of everything happening on the street, and of anyone who might be hatching plots against
you. The danger for most people comes when they feel threatened. In such
times they tend to retreat and close ranks, to find security in a kind of
fortress. In doing so, however, they come to rely for information on a
smaller and smaller circle, and lose perspective on events around them.
They lose maneuverability and become easy targets, and their isolation
makes them paranoid. As in warfare and most games of strategy, isolation
often precedes defeat and death.
In moments of uncertainty and danger, you need to fight this desire to
turn inward. Instead, make yourself more accessible, seek out old allies and
make new ones, force yourself into more and more different circles. This
has been the trick ofpowerful people for centuries.
The Roman statesman Cicero was born into the lower nobility, and
had little chance of power unless he managed to make a place for himself
among the aristocrats who controlled the city. He succeeded brilliantly,
identifying everyone with influence and figuring out how they were connected to one another. He mingled everywhere, knew everyone, and had
such a vast network of connections that an enemy here could easily be
counterbalanced by an ally there,
The French statesman Talleyrand played the game the same way. Although he came from one of the oldest aristocratic families in France, he
made a point of always staying in touch with what was happening in the
streets of Paris, allowing him to foresee trends and troubles. He even got a
certain pleasure out of mingling with shady criminal types, who supplied
him with valuable information. Every time there was a crisis, a transition of
power--the end of the Directory, the fall of Napoleon, the abdication of
Louis XVIII-~he was able to survive and even thrive, because he never
closed himself up in a small circle but always forged connections with the
new order.
This law pertains to kings and queens, and to those of the highest
power: The moment you lose contact with your people, seeking security in
isolation, rebellion is brewing. Never imagine yourself so elevated that you
can afford to cut yourself off from even the lowest echelons. By retreating
to a fortress, you make yourself an easy target for your plotting subjects,
who view your isolation as an insult and a reason for rebellion.
Since humans are such social creatures, it follows that the social arts
that make us pleasant to be around can be practiced only by constant exposure and circulation. The more you are in contact with others, the more
graceful and at ease you become. Isolation, on the other hand, engenders
an awkwardness in your gestures, and leads to further isolation, as people
start avoidmg you.
In 1545 Duke Cosimo I de’ Medici decided that to ensure the immor-
tality of his name he would commission frescoes for the main chapel of the
church of San Lorenzo in Florence. He had many great painters to choose
from, and in the end he picked jacopo da Pontonno. Getting on in years,
Pontormo wanted to make these frescoes his chef d’oeuvre and legacy. His
first decision was to close the chapel off with walls, partitions, and blinds.
He wanted no one to witness the creation of his masterpiece, or to steal his
ideas. He would outdo Michelangelo himself. When some young men
broke into the chapel out of curiosity, jacopo sealed it off even further.
Pontormo filled the chape1’s ceiling with biblical scenes—the Creation,
Adam and Eve, Noah's ark, on and on. At the top of the middle will he
painted Christ in his majesty, raising the dead onjudgment Day. The artist
worked on the chapel for eleven years, rarely leaving it, since he had de—
veloped a phobia for human contact and was afraid his ideas would be
stolen.
Ponrormo died before completing the frescoes, and none of them has
survived. But the great Renaissance writer Vasari, a friend of Pontormds
who saw the frescoes shortly after the artist’s death, left a description of
what they looked like. There was a total lack of proportion. Scenes
bumped against scenes, figures in one story beingjuxtaposed with those in
another, in maddening numbers. Pontormo had become obsessed with de»
tall but had lost any sense of the overall composition. Vasari left off his de~
scription of the frescoes by writing that if he continued, “I think I would go
mad and become entangled in this painting, just as I believe that in the
eleven years of time jacopo spent on it, he entangled himself and anyone
else who saw it.” Instead of crowning Pontormo’s career, the work became
his undoing.
These frescoes were visual equivalents of the effects of isolation on the
human mind: a loss ofproportion, an obsession with detail combined with
an inability to see the larger picture, a kind of extravagant ugliness that no
longer communicates. Clearly, isolation is as deadly for the creative arts as
for the social arts. Shakespeare is the most famous writer in history because, as a dramatist for the popular stage, he opened himself up to the
masses, making his work accessible to people no matter what their education and taste. Artists who hole themselves up in their fortress lose a sense
of proportion, their work communicating only to their small circle. Such
art remains cornered and powerless.
Finally, since power is a human creation, it is inevitably increased by
Contact with other people. Instead of falling into the fortress mentality,
view the world in the following manner: It is like a vast Versailles, with
every room communicating with another. You need to be permeable, able
to float in and out of different circles and mix with different types. That
kind ofmobility and social contact will protect you from plotters, who will
be unable to keep secrets from you, and from your enemies, who will be
unable to isolate you from your allies. Always on the move, you mix and
mingle in the rooms of the palace, never sitting or settling in one place. No
hunter can fix his aim on such a svvifbmoving creature.
LAW 18 135
I36 LAW 18
Image: The Fortress. High
up on the hill, the citadel be
comes a symbol of all that is
hateful in power and authority.
The citizens of the town betray
you to the first enemy that comes.
Cut off from communication and intelligence, the citadel falls with ease.
Authority: A good and wise ptince, desirous of maintaining that
character, and to avoid giving the opportunity to his sons to become oppressive, will never build fortresses, so that they may
place their reliance upon the good will of their subjects, and not
upon the strength of citadels. {Niccolo Machiavelli, 1469-4527)
REVE RSAL
It is hardly ever right and propitious to choose isolation. Without keeping
an ear on what is happening in the streets, you will be unable to protect
yourself. About the only thing that constant human contact cannot facili~
tate is thought. The weight of society's pressure to conform, and the lack of
distance from other people, can make it impossible to think clearly about
what is going on around you. As a
temporary recourse, then, isolation can
help you to gain perspective. Many a serious thinker has been produced in
prisons, where we have nothing to do but think. Machiavelli could write
The Prince only once he found himself in exile and isolated on a farm far
from the political intrigues of Florence.
The danger is, however, that this kind of isolation will sire all kinds of
strange and perverted ideas. You may gain perspective on the larger picture, but you lose a sense of your own smallness and limitations. Also, the
more isolated you are, the harder it is to break out of your isolation when
you choose to——it sinks you deep into its quicksand without your noticing.
If you need time to think, then, choose isolation only as a last resort, and
only in small doses. Be careful to keep your way back into society open.
LAW
19
KNOW WHO YOU’RE
DEALING WITHDO NOT OFFEND THE
WRONG PERSON
JUDGMENT
There are many different kinds ofpeople in the world,
and you can never assume that everyone will react to
your strategies in the same way. Deeeive or outmaneuver
some [maple and they will spend the rest oftheir lives seeking revenge. They are wolves in lambs’ clothing. Choose
your victims and opponents carefully, then-—never offend or deceive the wrongperson.
13?’
When you rneet a
swordsman, draw your
rwnrd: Do not recita
poetry 10 one who is
YXDYHIYUPI.
Fuom /\ CH‘/\N
Bcnmusi CLASSIC.
OU(7TF]') IN
‘lHllNl)l—iR INTHE; sou’,
TR.-\:~sL.r\TEo BY
THOMAS (l/I,F,ARY. 1993
TI II: ll|",\ l,\(.l' I)!‘
I.()|‘|‘, l>I: \(;l IHKIC
[Ln]/e dc] Agltirreir
riharactcr 1'’ amply
illustrate‘/1 in im urirc»
dour from (ht? chronicle
uf(}¢Ir(7il11.rlI de‘ la
Vega. who related that
in 1548 Aguirre was a
member ofa platoon of
wliliers excortirig
Indian slaves from the
mine: at Paton’
[Bolivia] to a
royal
treasury 11512111. The
Indians were illegally
lmrtlrmezl with great
quantities ofstlver, and
II [oral 0/flrriul urrevteil
Aguirre. senwricing
him to receive two
hundred lashes in lieu
oft: fine for appraising
the Indians. “The
soldier Aguirre, lutving
rrrcmvrerl a notificatitm
nflhe verztertce,
hesuughl the alcalde
that, iris‘t1'ml of/lugging
him he would put him
In death, for that he‘
was a gentleman by
birth. . . .All this had
no effect on the alcalde,
who ordered the executioner to bring a beast,
and eiemte the
.\'(mteI1(‘e. The 1-,xer:u—
tionrr came to the
138 LAW 19
OPPON ENTS, SUCKERS, AND VICTIMS: Preliminary Typology
In your rise to power you will come across many breeds of opponent,
sucker, and victim. The highest form of the art of power is the ability to distinguish the wolves from the lambs, the foxes from the hares, the hawks
from the vultures. If you make this distinction well, you will succeed with»
out needing to coerce anyone too much. But if you deal blindly with
whomever crosses your path, you will have a life of constant sorrow, if you
even live that long. Being able to recognize types of people, and to act accordingly, is critical. The following are the five most dangerous and difficult types of mark in the jungle, as identified by artists—con and
othetwise——of the past
The Arrogant and Proud Man. Although he may initially disguise
it, this man’s touchy pride makes him very dangerous. Any perceived
slight will lead to a
vengeance of overwhelming violence. You may say to
yourself, “But I only said such-and-such at a
party, where everyone was
drunk. . . .” It does not matter. There is no sanity behind his over-reaction,
so do not waste time trying to figure him out. If at any point in your deal
ings with a
person you sense an oversensitive and overactive pride, flee.
Whatever you are hoping for from him isn't worth it.
The Hopelessly Insecure Man. This man is related to the proud and arrogant type, but is less violent and harder to spot. His ego is fragile, his
sense of self insecure, and if he feels himself deceived or attacked, the hurt
will simmer. He will attack you in bites that will take forever to get big
enough for you to notice. If you find you have deceived or harmed such a
man, disappear for a
long time. Do not stay around him or he will nibble
you to death.
Mr. Suspicion. Another variant on the breeds above, this is a future _]oe
Stalin. He sees what he wants to see—usually the worst—in other people,
and imagines that everyone is after him. Mr. Suspicion is in fact the least
dangerous of the three: Genuinely unbalanced, he is easy to deceive, just as
Stalin himself was constantly deceived. Play on his suspicious nature to get
him to turn against other people. But if you do become the target of his suspicions, watch out.
The Serpent with a Long Memory. If hurt or deceived, this man will
show no anger on the surface; he will calculate and wait. Then, when he is
in a position to turn the tables, he will exact a
revenge marked by a coldblooded shrewdness. Recognize this man by his calculation and cunning in
the different areas of his life. He is usually cold and unaffectionate. Be doubly careful of this snake, and if you have somehow injured him, either
crush him completely or get him out ofyour sight.
The Plain, Unassuming, and Often Unintelligent Man. Ah, your ears
prick up when you find such a
tempting victim. But this man is a lot harder
to deceive than you imagine. Falling for a ruse often takes intelligence
and imagina1J'on—-a sense of the possible rewards. The blunt man will
not take the bait because he does not recognize it. He is that unaware. The
danger with this man is not that he will harm you or seek revenge, but
merely that he will waste your time, energy, resources, and even your san~
ity in trying to deceive him. Have a test ready for a mark—ajoke, a
story. If
his reaction is utterly literal, this is the type you are dealing with. Continue
at your own risk.
TRANSGRESSIONS OF THE LAW
Transgression I
In the early part of the thirteenth century, Muhammad, the shah of
Khwarezm, managed after many wars to forge a huge empire, extending
west to present-day Turkey and south to Afghanistan. The empire’s center
was the great Asian capital of Samarkand. The shah had a powerful, welltrained army, and could mobilize 200,000 waniors within days.
In 1219 Muhammad received an embassy from a new tribal leader to
the east, Genghis Khan. The embassy included all sorts of gifts to the great
Muhammad, representing the finest goods from Khan’s small but growing
Mongol empire. Genghis Khan wanted to reopen the Silk Route to Europe,
and offered to share it with Muhammad, while promising peace between
the two empires.
Muhammad did not know this upstart from the east, who, it seemed to
him, was extremely arrogant to try to talk as an equal to one so clearly his
superior. He ignored Khan’s offer. Khan tried again: This time he sent a
caravan of a hundred camels filled with the rarest articles he had plundered from China. Before the caravan reached Muhammad, however,
Inalchik, the governor of a
region bordering on Samarkand, seized it
for himself, and executed its leaders.
'
Genghis Khan was sure that this was a mistake—that Inalchik had
acted without Muhammad’s approval. He sent yet another mission to
Muhammad, reiterating his offer and asking that the governor be punished.
This time Muhammad himself had one of the ambassadors beheaded, and
sent the other two back with shaved heads-a horrifying insult in the Mongol code of honor. Khan sent a message to the shah: “You have chosen war.
What will happen will happen, and what it is to be we know not; only God
knows.” Mobilizing his forces, in 1220 he attacked Inalchik’s province,
where he seized the capital, captured the governor, and ordered him executed by having molten silver poured into his eyes and ears.
Over the next year, Khan led a series of guern‘lla~1ike campaigns
against the sha.h’s much larger army, His method was totally novel for the
time—his soldiers could move very fast on horseback, and had mastered
the art of firing with bow and arrow while mounted. The speed and flexibility of his forces allowed him to deceive Muhammad as to his intentions
and the directions of his movements. Eventually he managed first to surprison, and put Aguirre
on the beast. . . . The
beast war driven on,
and he receiver! the
l£15llt’..X. . .
W'l1en freed. Aguirre
announced his intarr
/ion 0_/‘killing the official who lmzl St’Ilf€I1C(’(l
him, the alcaldri
Esquivel, Esquiuelly
term nfoffire l’X[7Ir£?(l
and he/led to Lima,
three lmmlred tweruy
leagues away, but
within /ifrcen days
Aguirre hm] mzvkezl
him there. Theft-ighr
melt judge i()IlI‘ll€_W:'(l
tn Quim, a
Irip offour
/zmzdred l€agN€.\‘, and in
twenty days Aguirre
arn'w=d.
“When Erquivul /ward
of his presemr,
”
rurconlirig In Gzzrcilaso,
“he made anotl1t>r}'()urmy uffiw: humlreil
leagues tn Cuzco; but
in a few days Aguirre
also arrived, liming
tmvcllrcrl on foot and
William‘ .sI1oc.\‘, saying
that (1 Wllipped man
has‘ no l)u.sir1¢r.s,\‘ to rirlc
u h()P‘.Yt’., or to go where
he would be sezrtz by
01/mrs. In this way,
/iguzrrr fnllowmi his
judge for three years.
and/our Inmztlls."
Wcarying ofthe
pur.s'uz'I, Esquire]
remained at Cu.'./so, :2
city mr1erIzlygoverr:.ezI
/hat lzefclt he would be
safe from Agufrre. He
look a house near /he
rnrlmdral and never
\’€I’ltll7'(,’£l outdnorr
wirlwul a swan! and (1
dagger. “llnwevcr. on a
('£’l'l£lln Momlay, ut
mum. Aguirre entered
his lwu.\‘(.', and having
walked all over ii. and
having rrawtr.red u
corridor. :1 mloon, (2
L'lzurnber.mn1 an inner
LAW I9 139
chamber where the
judge kept his books.
he at last found him
axlcep over one ofltis
hm)/<.\', and stahbcd him
10 death. The murderer
then went out, but
when he came to the
door ofthe house, he
format’ that he had
forgotten his hat, and
had the temerity 10
return amf fetch it. and
then walked down
the street.”
'lHE GOLDEN l'lREAVl.‘
SI:F,Kl:llS 01- t~:L uotmuo.
WALKIER CIIAPMAN.
1967
‘fill’. (.R()V€ AND
Tllli I~»Ill‘l|'iP
A troublesome Crow
seated herself on the
back of a Slzccp. The
Sheep, much against his
will. carried her back—
ward and forward for (I
long time, and at last
said. “ifyou had
trcatetl a dug in this
way. yrtu would have:
had your desert: from
his sharp teeth, "
To this
the Crow rteplictl, “I
dexpiye the weak, and
yield to the strong. I
know whom I may
bully, and whom I must
firmer; and thtm I hope
to prolong my life to t1
AB, R
SIXTH (‘l:NTlIRY B1,‘.
140 LAW )9
round Samarkand, then to seize it. Muhammad fled, and a
year later died,
his vast empire broken and destroyed. Genghis Khan was sole master of
Samarkand, the Silk Route, and most of northern Asia.
Interpretation
Never assume that the person you are dealing with is weaker or less important than you are. Some men are slow to take offense, which may make
you misjudge the thickness of their skin, and fail to wony about insulting
them. But should you offend their honor and their pride, they will overwhelm you with a violence that seems sudden and extreme given their
slowness to anger. If you want to turn people down, it is best to do so po~
litely and respectfully, even if you feel their request is impudent or their
offer ridiculous. Never reject them with an insult until you know them better; you may be dealing with a Genghis Khan.
Transgression II
In the late 1910s some of the best swindlers in America formed a con-artist
ring based in Denver, Colorado. In the winter months they would spread
across the southern states, plying their trade. In 1920 Joe Furey, a leader of
the ring, was working his way through Texas, making hundreds of thousands of dollars with classic con games. In Fort Worth, he met a sucker
named j. Frank Norileet, a cattleman who owned a
large ranch. Nortleet
fell for the con. Convinced of the riches to come, he emptied his bank ac»
count of $45,000 and handed it over to Furey and his Confederates. A few
days later they gave him his “millions,” which turned out to be a few good
dollars wrapped around a packet of newspaper clippings.
Furey and his men had worked such cons a hundred times before, and
the sucker was usually so embarrassed by his gullibility that he quietly
learned his lesson and accepted the loss. But Norfleet was not like other
suckers. He went to the police, who told him there was little they could do.
“Then I’ll go after those people myselfl” Norfleet told the detectives. “I’ll
get them, too, ifit takes the rest of my life.” His wife took over the ranch as
Norileet scoured the country, looking for others who had been fleeced in
the same game. One such sucker came forward, and the two men identified
one of the con artists in San Francisco, and managed to get him locked up,
The man committed suicide rather than face a
long term in prison.
Norfleet kept going. He tracked down another of the con artists in
Montana, roped him like a calf, and dragged him through the muddy streets
to the town jail. He traveled not only across the country but to England,
Canada, and Mexico in Search ofjoe Furey, and also of Furey’s right-hand
man, W B. Spencer. Finding Spencer in Montreal, Norfleet chased him
through the streets. Spencer escaped but the rancher stayed on his trail and
caught up with him in Salt Lake City. Preferring the mercy of the law to
Nortleet’s wrath, Spencer turned himself in. =
Norfleet found Furey in Jacksonville, Florida, and personally hauled
him off to face justice in Texas. But he wouldn’t stop there: He continued
on to Denver, determined to break up the entire ring. Spending not only
large sums of money but another year ofhis life in the pursuit, he managed
to put all of the con n'ng’s leaders behind bars. Even some he didn’t catch
had grown so terrified of him that they too turned themselves in.
After five years ofhunting, Norfleet had single-handedly destroyed the
country’s largest confederation of con artists. The efiort bankrupted him
and mined his marriage, but he died a satisfied man.
Interpretation
Most men accept the humiliation of being conned with a sense of resignation. They learn their lesson, recognizing that there is no such thing as a
free lunch, and that they have usually been brought down by their own
greed for easy money. Some, however, refuse to take their medicine. In
stead ofreflecting on their own gullibility and avarice, they see themselves
as totally innocent victims.
Men like this may seem to be crusaders for justice and honesty, but
they are actually immoderately insecure. Being fooled, being conned, has
activated their self-doubt, and they are desperate to repair the damage.
Were the mortgage on N0rfleet’s ranch, the collapse of his marriage, and
the years of borrowing money and living in cheap hotels worth his revenge
over his embarrassment at being fleeced? To the Norfleets of the world,
overcoming their embarrassment is worth any price.
All people have insecurities, and often the best way to deceive a sucker
is to play upon his insecurities. But in the realm of power, everything is a
question of degree, and the person who is decidedly more insecure than
the average mortal presents great dangers. Be warned: If you practice de~
ception or trickery of any sort, study your mark well. Some people’s insecurity and ego fragility cannot tolerate the slightest offense. To see if you
are dealing with such a
type, test them first—make, say, a mildjoke at their
expense. A confident person will laugh; an overly insecure one will react as
ifpersonally insulted. If you suspect you are dealing with this type, find another victim.
Transgression III
In the fifth century B.C., Ch’ung-erh, the prince of Ch’in (in present-day
China), had been forced into exile. He lived modestly——even, sometimes,
in poverty—waiting for the time when he could return home and resume
his princely life. Once he was passing through the state of Cheng, where
the ruler, not knowing who he was, treated him rudely. The r1.1ler’s minister, Shu Chan, saw this and said, “This man is a worthy prince. May Your
Highness treat him with great courtesy and thereby place him under an
obligation!” But the ruler, able to see only the prince’s lowly station, ignored this advice and insulted the prince again. Shu Chan again warned
his master, saying, “If Your Highness cannot treat Ch’ung~erh with courtesy, you should put him to death, to avoid calamity in the future.” The
ruler only scoffed.
Years later, the prince was finally able to return home, his circumstances greatly changed. He did not forget who had been kind to him, and
LAW 19 I41
142 j LAW 19
who had been insolent, during his years of poverty. Least of all did he for»
get his treatment at the hands of the ruler ofCheng. At his first opportunity
he assembled a vast army and marched on Chang, taking eight cities, de~
straying the kingdom, and sending the ruler into an exile of his own.
Interpretation
You can never be sure who you are dealing with. A man who is of little importance and means today can be a
person of power tomorrow. We forget
a lot in our lives, but we rarely forget an insult.
How was the ruler of Cheng to know that Prince Ch’ung-erh was an
ambitious, calculating, cunning type, a
serpent with along memory? There
was really no way for him to know, you may say-—but since there was no
way, it would have been better not to tempt the fates by finding out. There
is nothing to be gained by insulting a
person unnecessarily Swallow the
impulse to offend, even if the other person seems weak. The satisfaction is
meager compared to the danger that someday be or she will be in a posi
tion to hurt you.
Transgresskm IV
The year of 1920 had been a particularly bad one for American art dealers.
Big buyers«-«the robber-baron generation of the previous century-~were
getting to an age where they were dying off like flies, and no new million»
aires had emerged to take their place. Things were so bad that a number of
the major dealers decided to pool their resources, an unheard-of event,
since art dealers usually get along like cats and dogs.
Joseph Duveen, art dealer to the richest tycoons of America, was suffering more than the others that year, so he decided to go along with this
alliance. The group now consisted ofthe five biggest dealers in the country.
Looking around for a new client, they decided that their last best hope was
Henry Ford, then the wealthiest man in America. Ford had yet to venture
into the art market, and he was such a big target that it made sense for them
to work together.
The dealers decided to assemble a list, “The 100 Greatest Paintings in
the World” (all of which they happened to have in stock), and to offer the
lot of them to Ford. With one purchase he could make himself the world’s
greatest collector. The consortium worked for weeks to produce a magnificent object: a three-volume set of books containing beautiful reproductions
of the paintings, as well as scholarly texts accompanying each picture. Next
they made a personal visit to Ford at his home in Dearborn, Michigan.
There they were surprised by the simplicity of his house: Mr. Ford was ob‘
viously an extremely unaffected man.
Ford received them in his study. Looking through the book, he expressed astonishment and delight. The excited dealers began imagining the
millions of dollars that would shortly flow into their coflers. Finally, how—
ever, Ford looked up from the book and said, “Gentlemen, beautiful books
like these, with beautiful colored pictures like these, must cost an awful
lot!” “But Mr. Ford!” exclaimed Duveen, “we don’t expect you to buy these
books. We got them up especially for you, to show you the pictures. These
books are a present to you.” Ford seemed puzzled. “Gentlemen,” he said,
“it is extremely nice of you, but I
really don’t see how I can accept a beautiful, expensive present like this from strangers.” Duveen explained to Ford
that the reproductions in the books showed paintings they had hoped to
sell to him. Ford finally understood. “But gentlemen,” he exclaimed, “what
would I want with the original pictures when the ones right here in these
books are so beautiful?”
Interpretation
Joseph Duveen prided himself on studying his victims and clients in ad
Vance, figuring out their weaknesses and the peculiarities of their tastes be
fore he ever met them. He was driven by desperation to drop this tactic just
once, in his assault on Henry Ford. It took him months to recover from his
misjudgrnent, both mentally and monetarily. Ford was the unassuming
plain—ma.n type who just isn’t worth the bother. He was the incarnation of
those literal-minded folk who do not possess enough imagination to be de
ceived. From then on, Duveen saved his energies for the Mellons and Morgans of the world——men crafty enough for him to entrap in his snares.
KEYS T() POWER
The ability to measure people and to know who you’re dealing with is the
most important skill of all in gathering and conserving power. Without it
you are blind: Not only will you offend the wrong people, you will choose
the Wrong types to work on, and will think you are flattering people when
you are actually insulting them. Before embarking on any move, take the
measure of your mark or potential opponent. Otherwise you will waste
time and make mistakes. Study people's weaknesses, the chinks in their
armor, their areas of both pride and insecurity. Know their ins and outs before you even decide whether or not to deal with them.
Two final words of caution: First, in judging and measuring your oppo~
nent, never rely on your instincts. You will make the greatest mistakes of all
if you rely on such inexact indicators. Nothing can substitute for gathering
concrete knowledge. Study and spy on your opponent for however long it
takes; this will pay off in the long run.
Second, never trust appearances. Anyone with a serpent’s heart can
use a show of kindness to cloak it; a
person who is blustery on the outside is
often really a coward. Learn to see through appearances and their contradictions. Never trust the version that people give of themselves——it is utterly unreliable.
LAW 19 ; 143
Image: The Hunter, He does not lay the
same trap for a wolf as for a fox. He does
not set bait where no one will take it.
He knows his prey thoroughly, its habits
and hideaways, and hunts accordingly.
Authority: Be Convinced, that there are no
persons so insignificant and inconsiderable,
but may, some time or other, have it in their
power to be of use to you; which they certainly will not, ifyou have once shown them
contempt. Wrongs are often forgiven, but
contempt never is. Our pride remembers
it for ever. (Lord Chesterfield, 1694-1773)
REVERSAL
What possible good can come from ignorance about other people? Leam
to tell the lions from the lambs or pay the price. Obey this law to its fullest
extent; it has no reversal—-do not bother looking for one.
I44 LAW 19
LAW
20
I)C)PJCYT CXDLJBJIT
'TC)1&DTY()PJE
JUDGMENT
It is thefool who always rushes to take sides. Do not commil to any side or cause but yourself By maintaining
your independence, you become the master of others——
playing people against one another, making them
pursue you.
'
I45
M6 ? LAW 20
PART I: DO NOT COMMIT TO ANYONE,
BUT BE COURTED BY ALL
Ifyou allow people tofeel they possess you to any degree, you lose allpower
over them. By not committing your affections, tfwy will only try harder to
win you over Stay aloof and you gain the power that comes from their at—
tention and frustrated desire. Play the Virgin Queen: Give them hope but
never satisfaction.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
When Queen Elizabeth I ascended the throne of England, in 1558, there
was much to-do about her finding a husband. The issue was debated in Parliament, and was a. main topic of conversation among Englishmen of all
classes; they often disagreed as to whom she should marry, but everyone
thought she should marry as soon as possible, for a queen must have a
king, and must bear heirs for the kingdom. The debates raged on for years.
Meanwhile the most handsome and eligible bachelors in the realm-Sir
Robert Dudley, the Earl of Essex, Sir Walter Ra.leigh———vied for Elizabetlfs
hand. She did not discourage them, but she seemed to be in no hurry, and
her hints as to which man might be her favorite often contradicted each
other. In 1566, Parliament sent a delegation to Elizabeth urging her to
marry before she was too old to bear children. She did not argue, nor did
she discourage the delegation, but she remained a
virgin nonetheless.
The delicate game that Elizabeth played with her suitors slowly made
her the subject of innumerable sexual fantasies and the object of cultish
worship. The court physician, Simon Forman, used his diary to describe
his dreams of deflowering her. Painters represented her as Diana and other
goddesses. The poet Edmund Spenser and others wrote eulogies to the Virgin Queen. She was referred to as “tha, wor1d’s Empresse,” “that virtuous
Virgo” who rules the world and sets the stars in motion. In conversation
with her, her many male suitors would employ bold sexual innuendo, a
dare that Elizabeth did not discourage. She did all she could to stir their in
terest and simultaneously keep them at bay.
Throughout Europe, kings and princes knew that a marriage with Elizabeth would seal an alliance between England and any nation. The king of
Spain wooed her, as did the prince of Sweden and the archduke of Austria.
She politely refused them all.
The great diplomatic issue of Elizabetlfs day was posed by the revolt
of the Flemish and Dutch Lowlands, which were then possessions of Spain.
Should England break its alliance with Spain and choose France as its main
ally on the Continent, thereby encouraging Flemish and Dutch independence? By 1570 it had come to seem that an alliance with France would be
England’s wisest course. France had two eligible men of noble blood, the
dukes ofAnjou and Alencon, brothers of the French king. Would either of
them marry Elizabeth? Both had advantages, and Elizabeth kept the hopes
of both alive. The issue simmered for years. The duke ofAnjou made sev-
eral visits to England, kissed Elizabeth in public, even called her by pet
names; she appeared to requite his affections. Meanwhile, as she flirted
with the two brothers, a
treaty was signed that sealed peace between
France and England. By 1582 Elizabeth felt she could break off the
courtship. In the case of the duke of Anjou in particular, she did so with
great relief: For the sake of diplomacy she had allowed herself to be
courted by a man whose presence she could not stand and whom she
found physically repulsive. Once peace between France and England was
secure, she dropped the unctuous duke as politely as she could.
By this time Elizabeth was too old to bear children. She was accordingly able to live the rest of her life as she desired, and she died the Virgin
Queen. She left no direct heir, but ruled through a period of incomparable
peace and cultural fertility. “
Interpretation
Elizabeth had good reason not to marry: She had witnessed the mistakes of
Mary Queen of Scots, her cousin. Resisting the idea of being ruled by a
woman, the Scots expected Mary to many and marry wisely. To wed a foreigner would be unpopular; to favor any particular noble house would
open up terrible rivalries. In the end Mary chose Lord Damley, a Catholic.
In doing so she incurred the wrath of Scotland’s Protestants, and endless
turmoil ensued.
Elizabeth knew that marriage can often lead to a female ru1er’s undoing: By marrying and committing to an alliance with one party or nation,
the queen becomes embroiled in conflicts that are not of her choosing, con~
flicts which may eventually overwhelm her or lead her into a futile war.
Also, the husband becomes the de facto ruler, and often tries to do away
with his wife the queen, as Darnley tried to get rid of Mary. Elizabeth
learned the lesson well. She had two goals as a ruler: to a‘ ‘old marriage and
to avoid war. She managed to combine these goals by Lnngling the possibility of marriage in order to forge alliances. The moment she committed
to any single suitor would have been the moment she lost her power. She
had to emanate mystery and desirability, never discouraging anyone’s
hopes but never yielding.
Through this lifelong game of flirting and withdrawing, Elizabeth
dominated the country and every man who sought to conquer her. As the
center of attention, she was in control. Keeping her independence above
all, Elizabeth protected her power and made herself an object ofworship.
I would rather be a beggar and single than a
queen and married.
Queen l‘?l1':alzzth I, 15 33-161]?
KEYS 'l‘(..) POWER
Since power depends greatly on appearances, you must learn the tricks
that will enhance your image. Refusing to commit to a
person or group is
one of these, When you hold yourself back, you incur not anger but a kind
LAW 20 § 147
148 LAW 20
of respect. You instantly seem powerful because you make yourself ungraspable, rather than succumbing to the group, or to the relationship, as
most people do. This aura of power only grows with time: As your reputation for independence grows, more and more people will come to desire
you, wanting to be the one who gets you to commit. Desire is like a virus: If
we see that someone is desired by other people, we tend to find this person
desirable too.
The moment you commit, the magic is gone. You become like everyone else. People will try all kinds of underhanded methods to get you to
commit. They will give you gifts, shower you with favors, all to put you
under obligation. Encourage the attention, stimulate their interest, but do
not commit at any cost. Accept the gifts and favors if you so desire, but be
careful to maintain your inner aloofness, You cannot inadvertently allow
yourself to feel obligated to anyone.
Remember, though: The goal is not to put people off, or to make it seem
that you are incapable of commitment. Like the Virgin Queen, you need to
stir the pot, excite interest, lure people with the possibility of having you.
You have to bend to their attention occasionally, then——but never too far:
The Greek soldier and statesman Alcibiades played this game to perfection. It was Alcibiades who inspired and led the massive Athenian atmada that invaded Sicily in 414 BC. When envious Athenians back home
tried to bring him down by accusing him of trumpedup charges, he defected to the enemy, the Spartans, instead offacing a trial back home. Then,
after the Athenians were defeated at Syracuse, he left Sparta for Persia, even
though the power of Sparta was now on the rise. Now, however, both the
Athenians and the Spartans courted Alcibiades because of his influence
with the Persians; and the Pen tans showered him with honors because of
his power over the Athenians and the Spartans. He made promises to every
side but committed to none, and in the end he held all the cards.
If you aspire to power and influence, try the Alcibiades tactic: Put
yourself in the middle between competing powers. Lure one side with the
promise of your help; the other side, always wanting to outdo its enemy,
will pursue you as well. As each side vies for your attention, you will immediately seem a
person of great influence and desirability. More power
will accrue to you than if you had rashly committed to one side. To perfect
this tactic you need to keep yourself inwardly free from emotional entanglements, and to view all those around you as pawns in your rise to the top.
You cannot let yourself become the lackey for any cause.
In the midst of the 1968 U.S. presidential election, Henry Kissinger
made a phone call to Richard Nixon’s team. Kissinger had been allied with
Nelson Rockefeller, who had unsuccessfully sought the Republican nomination. Now Kissinger offered to supply the Nixon camp with valuable inside
information on the negotiations for peace in Vietnam that were then going
on in Paris. He had a man on the negotiating team keeping him informed of
the latest developments. The Nixon team gladly accepted his offer.
At the same time, however, Kissinger also approached the Democratic
nominee, Hubert Humphrey, and offered his aid. The Humphrey people
asked him for inside information on Nixon and he supplied it. “Look,”
Kissinger told Hurnphrey’s people, “I’ve hated Nixon for years.” In fact he
had no interest in either side. What he really wanted was what he got: the
promise of a high-level cabinet post from both Nixon and Humphrey.
Whichever man won the election, Kissingefs career was secure.
The winner, of course, was Nixon, and Kissinger duly went on to his
cabinet post. Even so, he was careful never to appear too much of a Nixon
man. When Nixon was reelected in 1972, men much more loyal to him
than Kissinger were fired. Kissinger was also the only Nixon high official to
survive Watergate and serve under the next president, Gerald Ford. By
maintaining a little distance he thrived in turbulent times.
Those who use this strategy often notice a
strange phenomenon:
People who rush to the support of others tend to gain little respect in the
process, for their help is so easily obtained, while those who stand back
find themselves besieged with supplicants. Their aloofness is powerful, and
everyone wants them on their side.
When Picasso, after early years of poverty, had become the most successful aitist in the world, he did not commit himself to this dealer or that
dealer, although they now besieged him from all sides with attractive offers
and grand promises. Instead, he appeared to have no interest in their services; this technique drove them wild, and as they fought over him his
prices only rose. When Henry Kissinger, as U.S. secretary of state, wanted
to reach détente with the Soviet Union, he made no concessions or conciliatory gestures, but courted China instead. This infuriated and also scared
the Soviets——-they were already politically isolated and feared further isola
tion if the United States and China, ,ca.me together. Kissinger’s move
pushed them to the negotiating table. The tactic has a parallel in seduction:
When you want to seduce a woman, Stendhal advises, court her sister first.
Stay aloof and people will come to you. It will become a challenge for
them to win your affections. As long as you imitate the wise Virgin Queen
and stimulate their hopes, you will remain a magnet of attention and desire.
Image:
The Virgin Queen.
The center of attention,
desire, and worship. Never
succumbing to one suitor or the
other, the Virgin Queen keeps
them all revolving around
her like planets, unable to
leave her orbit but never
getting any closer
to her.
Authority: Do not commit
yourself to anybody or any
thing, for that is to be a slave, a
slave to every man. . . .Above
all, keep yourself free of commitments and obligations——
they are the device of another
to get you into his power. . . .
(Baltasar Gracian, 1601-1658)
LAW 20 149
'11“ l\!H',.\‘ HM’
(,|{0\\.~'. .\\l) TU!‘ t-(9.\
731¢’ lrilcs am] the rrmvx
made an ngn=um'n1
mmmg zhcmwlves {lust
ilujv 3'/wuld go hrtivcza
in out-rytlziivg obttlitzal
in t}1efor¢:1'I. One day
Hwy saw u
jbx that Jim!
b{'t.’iZ WUI1‘t16,(’(I by
hunter: tying Iiel]If€.s'.\‘
mulrr a trim‘, and gathered mmm‘ it.
Thy rnzws said. “We
will’ mkc the upper half
uftlw fax. "
“'I'£n:Ia nu:
It(I! (aim the [own
h1:i_1'.'"x12i1I the lcilzas,
The {cu ?(lughl’d at this;
am! mid. “! aIwa_v.s‘
thought the kims u-‘ere
superior in crenlirm to
the crcmix; XIX ,s‘u<:h tlujv
muxt gel the uppzr half
afnzy hm:!_V~ nfwhich
In}: haul, warh the brain
(mil other rte-!t'<‘t4!e
rlu'ng.\~ m r1,_/"arms 1!
portion.
"
“Uh, },‘n’.\'. that (Y right,
"
xutot the kites’, "we will
ha w that gun of Ihl,‘
fox.
"
“./'\/at cu <11/."st1id
the rmwx, “um must
have
'
‘already
agr('v1I," Titan :1 war
(time I)<'Iwcen the rival
]mrliz'.\. and at great
many fvll rm I>r1rI1.<irIm,
am! the rmttuirttrzg few
z'.s'<’apr-d with zli_I]1'('uIIy.
The tax mutuuwr1'
them for snnw {l{1}>,\‘,
‘/50 , LAW2n
PART 11: DO NOT C.(.)MMl'1‘ TO ANYONE—-
STAY ABOVE THE FRAY
Do not let people dragyou into their petty fights and squabbles. Seem interested and suppcwtive, butfind a way to mnain neutral; let others do the
fighting while you stand back, watch and wait. When the fighting patties
am good and tired thvy will be ripe for the picking. You can make it a practice, infact, to stir up quarrels between otherpeople, and then offer to mediate, gaining power as the go-between.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
In the late fifteenth century, the strongest city~states in Italy-——Venice, Florence, Rome, and Milan~—-found themselves constantly squabbling. Hovering above their struggles were the nations of France and Spain, ready to
grab whatever they could from the weakened Italian powers. And trapped
in the middle was the small state of Mantua, ruled by the young Duke
Gianfrancesco Gonzaga. Mantua was strategically located in northern
Italy, and it seemed only a matter of time before one of the powers swallowed it up and it ceased to exist as an independent kingdom.
Gonzaga was a fierce warrior and a skilled commander of troops, and
he became a kind of mercenzuy general for whatever side paid him best. In
the year 1490, he married Isabella d’Este, daughter of the ruler of another
small Italian duchy, Ferrara. Since he now spent most of his time away
iron Mantua, it fell to Isabella to rule in his stead.
lsabellzfs first true test as ruler came in 1498, when King Louis XII of
France was preparing armies to attack Milan. In their usual perfidious fash«
ion, the Italian states immediately looked for ways to profit from Mila.n’s
difficulties. Pope Alexander VI promised not to intervene, thereby giving
the French carte blanche. The Venefians signaled that they would not help
Milan, either—and in exchange for this, they hoped the French would give
them Mantua. The ruler of Milan, Lodovico Sforza, suddenly found himself alone and abandoned. He turned to Isabella d’Este, one of his closest
friends (also rumored to be his lover), and begged her to persuade Duke
Gonzaga to come to his aid. Isabella tried, but her husband balked, for he
saw Sforza’s cause as hopeless. And so, in 1499, Louis swooped down on
Milan and took it with ease.
Isabella now faced a dilemma: If she stayed loyal to Lodovico, the
French would now move against her. But if, instead, she allied herself with
France, she would make enemies elsewhere in Italy, compromising Mantua once Louis eventually withdrew. And if she looked to Venice or Rome
for help, they would simply swallow up Mantua under the cloak of coming
to her aid. Yet she had to do something. The mighty king of France was
breathing down her neck: She decided to befxiend him, as she had be~
friended Lodovico Sforza before him——-with alluring gifts, witty, intelligent
letters, and the possibility of her company, for Isabella was famous as a
woman of incomparable beauty and charm.
In 1500 Louis invited Isabella to a great party in Milan to celebrate his
victory. Leonardo da Vinci built an enormous mechanical lion for the affair: When the lion opened its mouth, it spewed fresh lilies, the symbols of
French royalty. At the party Isabella wore one of her celebrated dresses
(she had by far the largest wardrobe of any of the Italian princesses), and
just as she had hoped, she charmed and captivated Louis, who ignored all
the other ladies vying for his attention. She soon became his constant companion, and in exchange for her friendship he pledged to protect Mantua’s
independence from Venice.
As one danger receded, however, another, more worrying one arose,
this time from the south, in the form of Cesare Borgia Starting in 1500,
Borgia had marched steadily northward, gobbling up all the small kingdoms in his path in the name of his father, Pope Alexander. Isabella under»
stood Cesare perfectly: He could be neither tnisted 1101' in any way
offended. He had to be cajoled and kept at arm’s length. Isabella began by
sending him gifts——falcons, prize dogs, perfumes, and dozens of masks,
which she knew he always wore when he walked the streets of Rome. She
sent messengers with flattering greetings (although these messengers also
acted as her spies). At one point Cesare asked if he could house some
troops in Mantua; Isabella managed to dissuade him politely, knowing full
well that once the troops were quartered in the city, they would never
leave.
Even while Isabella was charming Cesare, she convinced everyone
around her to take care never to utter a harsh word about him, since he
had spies everywhere and would use the slightest pretext for invasion.
When Isabella had a child, she asked Cesare to be the godfather. She even
dangled in front of him the possibility of a marriage between her family
and his. Somehow it all worked, for although elsewhere he seized everything in his path, he spared Mantua.
In 1503 Cesare’s father, Alexander, died, and a few years later the new
pope, Julius II, went to war to drive the French troops from Italy. When
the ruler of Fe1rara——Alfonso, Isabella’s brother—sided with the French,
Julius decided to attack and humble him. Once again Isabella found herself
in the middle: the pope on one side, the French and her brother on the
other. She dared not ally herself with either, but to offend either would be
equally disastrous. Again she played the double game at which she had become so expert. On the one hand she got her husband Gonzaga to fight for
the pope, knowing he would not fight very hard. On the other she let
French troops pass through Mantua to come to Ferrara’s aid. While she
publicly complained that the French had “invaded” her territory, she privately supplied them with valuable information. To make the invasion
plausible to Julius, she even had the French pretend to plunder Mantua. It
worked once again: The pope left Mantua alone.
In 1513, after a
lengthy siege, Julius defeated Ferrara, and the French
troops withdrew. Worn out by the effort, the pope died a few months later.
With his death, the nightmarish cycle of battles and petty squabbles began
to repeat itself.
leisurely /keding on the
dead kites and crows.
and then left the place
Italy and hearty,
observing, "The Ivmk
hem?/it by Ilze 1]M(lI‘I‘tf].¥
of (he mighty."
INDIAN EARLF3
Men ofgreat abilities
are slow :0 act. for it is
easier In avoid ncca«
.s'irm.r for commiltirzg
yourself than to (‘only
well nut (If a commitmml. Such 0L'L'llSf07lS
test yourjudgmeut; it is
safer to avoid them
than to emerge victurr
nus from them. One
obligation loads to a
greater one. and you
mme very neur tn the
brink 0/'di.m.\'ter.
BALTASAR GR/u'1A:\‘.
16014658
LAW 20 I51
'11 Eli‘. l§A<;l E AND T}il-Z .‘~'()\X'
Art eagle built a nest on
a tree, and hatched out
some euglets. And fl
wild sow brought her
litter umier the tree.
T111’ aagfe used tofly
off’after her prey. and
bring it back to her
young. And the sow
rooted around the tree
and hunted in the
woods, and when night
came she would bring
her young something
to eat.
And the eagle and the
sow lived in neighborly
fashion. And a
grimalkin laid her
plum‘ to destroy the
eaglezs and the little
Sucrking pigr She went
to the eagle, and said:
"Eagle, you had better
nalfly very far away.
Beware ofthe sow;shc
ix planning an evil
design. She is going (0
undemzine the roots of
the tree. You see she is‘
rooting ah? the time."
Then the grmuzlkin
went to the sow and
mid: "Saw, you have
not 42 good tteighbor.
Last Uvfntng I heard
the eagle saying to her
eagles‘: ‘My
dear (title
eaglels,1 am going to
treat you to a nice little
pig. Just as soon as the
row is gone, I will bring
you it little young
sucking pig. ‘"
From that time the
eagle ceased tojiy out
after prey, mad the sow
did not go any more
into thr_fnre.vt. The
euglets and the young
pigs perished of
.§‘!l1t'\’fl~
tion. mm‘ grimztlkin
fenstrci on them.
mnx.r=.s,
1,150 ToLSTOY.
[R28-#1010
152' LAW 20
A great deal changed in Italy during Isabella’s reign: Popes came and
went, Cesare Borgia rose and then fell, Venice lost its empire, Milan was in
vaded, Florence fell into decline, and Rome was sacked by the Hapsburg
Emperor Charles V. Through all this, tiny Mantua not only survived but
thrived, its court the envy of Italy. Its wealth and sovereignty would remain
intact for a century after Isabella’s death, in 1539.
Interpretation
Isabella d’Este understood Italy’s political situation with amazing clarity:
Once you took the side of any of the forces in the field, you were doomed.
The powerful would take you over, the weak would wear you down. Any
new alliance would lead to a new enemy, and as this cycle stirred up more
conflict, other forces would be dragged in, until you could no longer extricate yourself. Eventually you would collapse from exhaustion.
Isabella steered her kingdom on the only course that would bring her
safely through. She would not allow herself to lose her head through loy~
alty to a duke or a king. Nor would she try to stop the conflict that raged
around her---that would only drag her into it. And in any case the conflict
was to her advantage. If die various parties were fighting to the death, and
exhausting themselves in the process, they were in no position to gobble
up Mantua. The source of Isabella’s power was her clever ability to seem
interested in the affairs and interests of each side, while actually commib
ting to no one but herself and her kingdom.
Once you step into a. fight that is not of your own choosing, you lose all
initiative. The combatants’ interests become your interests; you become
their tool. Learn to control yourself, to restrain your natural tendency to
take sides and join the fight. Be friendly and charming to each of the com~
batants, then step back as they collide. V/Wth every battle they grow weaker,
while you grow stronger with every battle you avoid.
When the snipe and the mussel struggle, thefishetman gets the benefit.
Ancient Chinese saying
KEYS TO POWER
To succeed in the game of power, you have to master your emotions. But
even if you succeed in gaining such self-control, you can never control the
temperamental dispositions of those around you. And this presents a great
danger. Most people operate in a whirlpool of emotions, constantly react‘
ing, churning up squabbles and conflicts. Your sell’—contIol and autonomy
will only bother and infuriate them. They will my to draw you into the
whirlpool, begging you to take sides in their endless battles, or to make
peace for them. If you succumb to their emotional entreaties, little by little
you will find your mind and time occupied by their problems. Do not allow
whatever compassion and pity you possess to suck you in. You can never
win in this game; the conflicts can only multiply.
On the other hand, you cannot completely stand aside, for that would
cause needless offense. To play the game properly, you must seem interested in other people‘s problems, even sometimes appear to take their side.
But while you make outward gestures of support, you must maintain your
inner energy and sanity by keeping your emotions disengaged. No matter
how hard people try to pull you in, never let your interest in their affairs
and petty squabbles go beyond the surface. Give them gifts, listen with a
sympathetic look, even occasionally play the charmer-—but inwardly keep
both the friendly kings and the perfidious Borgias at arm’s length. By refus~
ing to commit and thus maintaining your autonomy you retain the initiative: Your moves stay matters of your own choosing, not defensive
reactions to the push-and~pu1l of those around you.
Slowness to pick up your weapons can be a weapon itself, especially if
you let other people exhaust themselves fighting, then take advantage of
their exhaustion. In ancient China, the kingdom of Chin once invaded the
kingdom of Hsing. Huan, the ruler of a nearby province, thought he
should rush to Hsing’s defense, but his adviser counseled him to wait:
“Hsing is not yet going to ruin,” he said, “and Chin is not yet exhausted. If
Chin is not exhausted, [we] cannot become very influential. Moreover, the
merit of supporting a state in danger is not as great as the virtue ofreviving
a ruined one.” The adviser’s argument won the day, and as he had predicted, Huan later had the glory both of rescuing Hsing from the brink of
destruction and then of conquering an exhausted Chin. He stayed out of
the fighting until the forces engaged in it had worn each other down, at
which point it was safe for him to intervene.
That is what holding back from the fray allows you: time to position
yourselfto take advantage of the situation once one side starts to lose. You
can also take the game a
step further, by promising your support to both
sides in a conflict while maneuvering so that the one to come out ahead in
the struggle is you. This was whatCastn1ccio Castracani, ruler of the Italian
town of Lucca in the fourteenth century, did when he had designs on the
town of Pistoia. A siege would have been expensive, costing both lives and
money, but Castruccio knew that Pistoia contained two rival factions, the
Blacks and the Whites, which hated one another. He negotiated with the
Blacks, promising to help them against the Whites; then, without their
knowledge, he promised the Whites he would help them against the
Blacks. And Castruccio kept his promiseswhe sent an army to a Blackcontrolled gate to the city, which the sentxies of course welcomed in.
Meanwhile another of his armies entered through a White—control1ed gate.
The two armies united in the middle, occupied the town, killed the leaders
of both factions, ended the internal war, and took Pistoia for Castruccio.
Preserving your autonomy gives you options when people come to
blows—~you can play the mediator, broker the peace, while really securing
your own interests. You can pledge support to one side and the other may
have to court you with a higher bid. Or, like Castruccio, you can appear to
take both sides, then play the antagonists against each other.
Dftentimes when a conflict breaks out, you are tempted to side with
the stronger party, or the one that offers you apparent advantages in an alTHE Pliltlli OF E'\'\"Y
While a poor woman
stood in the markerplace selling cheeses, (1
cat came along and
carried offu cheese. A
dog saw the pilferer
and Iried to lake the
cheese away from him.
The cat stood up la the
dog. So they pitched
into each other. The
dog barked and
mapped; the ca! spa:
and scratched, but they
could bring the battle
to no decision,
“Let's go to the fox and
have him referee the
mailer," the cat finally
suggested.
“Agreed, "
said the dog.
So they wen! In the fox.
The fox listened to their
arguments with ajurli~
ciaus air.
“Foolish animals," he
chided them, “why
carry on like that? If
both of you are willing,
I'll divide the cheese in
two and you’ll both be
satisfied. "
“/lgrecrl. "said die cut
and the dog.
50 the fax took out his
knife and cut the ltheese
in two, but, instead of
czuting it lengthwise, he‘
Cut it in the width.
"My lmlfis smaller!"
protested the dog.
The for looked judiciously through his
.s'pectarle.r at the dog's
share,
"You're right, quite
right!" he decided.
So he went and bit off
a piece ofrhe catk
share.
“That will make it
evem”' he said.
When the cm‘ saw what
Ihe fox did she began
10 yowl:
LAW 20 153
“Jam! look.’ My port 3*
.\'ma[l4'r noun‘
"
The fox again put on
his \pm‘/m,'It'.\' um!
looked jutliciously 41!
the calis‘ .8/luff.
“Right you are/"mid
(hv fox. “./last (0
/Iumzmt, and I’ll make
it ng/tr.
“
And he went and bit
0/fa ])l('('i", from {hr
dog’; vlzeevv
’I7'Ii.\‘ wen! mi \'1; long,
with the fox nibbling
;‘5r.\‘.t as the (logic and
then at /he cat}: simre.
that 1ie*fEna:’!_v are up
(he whale cheese brforc’
their ey<'.s'.
A 'lKEASUi<Y or .lF.WL\H
F()i,,KL<)Rl:.
NA'l'iI»\N Atr<\:1;H.1‘r)..
1 948
154 LAW 20
Hence. This is risky business. First, it is often difficult to foresee which side
will prevail in the long run. But even if you guess right and ally yourself
with the stronger party, you may find yourself swallowed up and lost, or
conveniently forgotten, when they become victors. Side with the weaker,
on the other hand, and you are doomed. But play a waiting game and you
cannot lose.
In Frances July Revolution of 1830, after three days ofriots, the statesman Talleyrand, now elderly, sat by his Paris window, listening to the peeling bells that signaled the riots were over. Turning to an assistant, he said,
“Ah, the bells! We’re winning.” “Who’s ‘we,’ man puma?” the assistant
asked. Gesturing for the man to keep quiet, Talleyrand replied, “Not a
word! I’ll tell you who we are tomorrow.” He well knew that only fools
rush into a situalion—tl1a.t by committing too quickly you lose your ma~
neuverability. People also respect you less: Perhaps tomorrow, they think,
you will commit to another, dilferent cause, since you gave yourself so eas
ily to this one. Good fortune is a fickle god and will often pass from one
side to the other. Commitment to one side deprives you ofthe advantage of
time and the luxury of waiting. Let others fall in love with this group or
that; for your part don’t rush in, don’t lose your head.
Finally, there are occasions when it is wisest to drop all pretence of appearing supportive and instead to trumpet your independence and self»
reliance. The aristocratic pose of independence is particularly important
for those who need to gain respect. George Washington recognized this in
his work to establish the young American republic on firm ground As
president, Washington avoided the temptation of making an alliance with
France or England, despite the pressure on him to do so. He wanted the
country to earn the world’s respect through its independence. Although a
treaty with France mighthave helped in the short toxin, in the long run he
knew it would be more effective to establish the nation’s autonomy. Europe would have to see the United States as an equal power.
Remember: You have only so much energy and so much time. Every
moment wasted on the affairs of others subtracts from your strength. You
may be afraid that people will condemn you as heartless, but in the end,
maintaining your independence and selfvreliance will gain you more re
spect and place you in a position of power from which you can choose to
help others on your own initiative.
Image: A Thicket of Shrubs.
In the forest, one shrub
latches on to another.
entzmgling its Iwighboi‘
with its thorns, the thicket
slowly extending its impenetrable domain‘ Only what
keeps its clistancze and
stands apart can grow and
rise above the thicket.
Authority: Regard it as
more courageous not to
become involved in an
engagement than to win
in battle, and where there
is already one interfering
fool, take care that there
shall not be two. (Baltasar
Gracian, 1601-1658}
REVERSAL
Both parts of this law will turn against you if you take it too far. The game
proposed here is delicate and difficult. If you play too many parties against
one another, they will see through the maneuver and will gang up on you.
If you keep your growing number of suitors waiting too long, you will inspire not desire but distrust. People will start to lose interest. Eventually
you may find it worthwhile to commit to one sidevwifonly for appearances’
sake, to prove you are capable of attachment.
Even then, however, the key will be to maintain your inner independence-—to keep yourself from getting emotionally involved. Preserve the
unspoken option of being able to leave at any moment and reclaim your
freedom if the side you are allied with starts to collapse. The friends you
made while you were being courted will give you plenty of places to go
once you jump ship.
LAW 20 755
156 ;
LAW
21
PLAY A SUCKER TO CATCH
A SUCKER-——~SEEM DUMBER
THAN YOUR MARK
JUDGMISNT
No one likes feeling st-upider than the next person. The
hick, tiwn, is to make your victims feel smart——-and not
just smart, but smarter than you am. Once convinced of
this, they will never suspect that you may have ulterior
motives.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
In the winter of 1872, the U.S. financier Asbury Harpending; was visiting
London when he received a cable: A diamond mine had been discovered
in the American West. The cable came from a reliable source—-William
Ralston, owner of the Bank of Califomia—-but Harpending nevertheless
took it as a practical joke, probably inspired by the recent discovery of
huge diamond mines in South Africa. True, when reports had first come in
of gold being discovered in the western United States, everyone had been
skeptical, and those had turned out to be true. But a diamond mine in the
West‘ Haipending showed the cable to his fellow financier Baron Roth
schild (one of the richest men in the world), saying it must be a
joke. The
baron, however, replied, “Don’t be too sure about that. America is a
very
large country. It has furnished the world with many surprises already. Perhaps it has others in store.” Harpending promptly took the first ship back
to the States.
When Harpending reached San Francisco, there was an excitement in
the air recalling the Gold Rush days of the late 1840s. Two crusty prospectors named Philip Arnold and john Slack had been the ones to find the diamond mine. They had not divulged its location, in Wyoming, but had led
. aliighly respected mining expert to it several weeks back, taking a circular
route so he could not guess his whereabouts. Once there, the expert had
watched as the miners dug up diamonds. Back in San Francisco the expert
had taken the gems to various jewelers, one of whom had estimated their
worth at $15 million.
Ha:-pending and Ralston now asked Amold and Slack to accompany
them back to New York, where the jeweler Charles Tiffany would verify
the original estimates. The prospectors responded uneasily--they smelled
a trap: How could they must these city slickers? Vifhat ifTiffany and the financiers managed to steal the whole mine out from under them? Ralston
tried to allay their fears by giving them $100,000 and placing another
$300,000 in escrow for them. If the deal went through, they would be paid
an additional $300,000. The miners agreed.
The little group traveled to New York, where a meeting was held at the
mansion of Samuel L. Barlow. The cream of the city’s aristocracy was in attx-,ndance——General George Brinton McClellan, commander of the Union
forces in the Civil War; General Benjamin Butler; Horace Greeley, editor
of the newspaper the New Ybrk Tribune; Harpending; Ralston; and Tiffany.
Only Slack and Arnold were missing—-as tourists in the city, they had decided to go sight-seeing.
When Tiffany announced that the gems were real and worth a. fortune,
the financiers could barely control their excitement. They wired Roth-
_,
schild and other tycoons to tell them about the diamond mine and inviting
them to share in the investment. At the same time, they also told the
prospectors that they wanted one more test: They insisted that a mining exI pert of their choosing accompany Slack and Arnold to the site to verify its
'
wealth. The prospectors reluctantly agreed. In the meantime, they said,
Now. tlnm: is nothing
of which a mun is
prouder than of Imeliecvuul ubiliIy,for 11 is
this that gives him his’
mmmarzding plan: In
the animal world. 1: is
an e.rz:eerIingIy rush
thing to let anyone we
(ha: you are decidedly
3:upcriur10him in [his
respect, and to let other
people see it too. . . .
Hence, while rank and
riciies may always
rec kon upon deferenIial rreamzmr in sncirrzy;
that is s()mc,'2’hiIIg u,hin'z
inzeitrrctmil ability can
never expect: To be
ignored is the grecltcsl
favour rliowri 10 it; and
ifpr-‘opts rwlice it at all,
it is lwcausc they
regard If as a pI'.c’r‘e of
impertmrmrr, or else as
$(>metIn'ng tn whirl: its
p:n:¢e.v.s'rn' [ms no legitimarc right, and upon
which he dares In pride
hirIm’If.' and in remindlion and revenge for
his conduct, people
soc-relly Irv am! lzunn'iiale hill! in some other
way.’ and ifthey wait to
do this, 1'1 15 only for 41
fitting oppm'mm'iy. A
man may be rLHm!11bIv
as p().s'.riI7lcii1 his
ilemcunour. and ye!
/mrdly ever get people
to overlook his crime
in xru/irling imeI[ecmally above them. In the
Garden of Roses. Sadr‘
make-5 thz: remark.-
"You should know that
fuoli.s‘]1 [imply an! a
humiredfnlzi monuwerse 10 meeting (he
wire than I/In’ wise
are irutir/:<m’ci /or
(he company of
me foolish."
LAW 21 15?‘
()n (he other /mm]. It i.\'
11 rml remrrinwmlulirm
to be stupizl. For m.s.‘tz/1.x‘
wumulz is agrcrtuh/¢' to
the (Indy. .\'l7 it rlmtv the
mind gum! lo feel its
\'upz'Vmri!y.' and 41 man
will seek <'Im1])unV
likely to give him I/nix‘
fwlnzg, us inmmzrvcly
us he Will uppruuc/1 the
_firr'plm*v or walk m the
.\‘IlVl if he warns to get
warm. Bu! llzlr mcam‘
that In: will be ills/ikurl
rm tlttffltttll ufhix superiority; umi 1'/cl man ix
/0 be Iilrml. he mm‘!
really be in/'eriur in
pain! ofinrcllecl.
A R I Hi ZR
Sr II(wl~.N|IAL=|~:R.
l7h‘2*l~l?<(»()
158 1 LAW 21
they had to return to San Francisco. The jewels that Tiffany had examined
they left with Harpending for safekeeping.
Several weeks later, a man named Louis Janin, the best mining expert
in the country, met the prospectors in San Francisco. _]ani.n was a born
skeptic who was determined to make sure that the mine was not a fraud.
Accompanying janin were Harpending, and several other interested fi~
nanciers. As with the previous expert, the prospectors led the team through
a complex series of canyons, completely confusing them as to their where
abouts. Arriving at the site, the financiers watched in amazement as janin
dug the area up, leveling anthills, turning over boulders, and finding emeralds, rubies, sapphires, and most of all diamonds. The dig lasted eight days,
and by the end, was convinced: He told the investors that they now
possessed the richest field in mining history. “With a hundred men and
proper machinery," he told them, “I would guarantee to send out one mil
lion dollars in diamonds every thirty days."
Returning to San Francisco a few days later, Ralston, Harpending, and
company acted fast to form a $10 million corporation of private investors.
First, however, they had to get rid of Arnold and Slack. That meant hiding
their excitement—they certainly did not want to reveal the field’s real
value. So they played possum. Who knows if_]anin is right, they told the
prospectors, the mine may not be as rich as we think. This just made the
prospectors angry. Trying a different tactic, the financiers told the two men
that if they insisted on having shares in the mine, they would end up being
fleeced by the unscrupulous tycoons and investors who would run the corporation; better, they said, to take the $700,000 already offerecl—an enor»
mous sum at the time—and put their greed aside. This the prospectors
seemed to understand, and they finally agreed to take the money, in return
signing the rights to the site over to the financiers, and leaving maps to it.
News of the mine spread like wildfire. Prospectors fanned out across
Wyoming. Meanwhile Harpending and group began spending the millions
they had collected from their investors, buying equipment, hiring the best
men in the business, and furnishing luxurious offices in New York and San
0
Francisco.
A few weeks later, on their first trip back to the site, they learned the
hard truth: Not a single diamond or ruby was to be found. It was all a fake.
They were mined. Harpending had unwittingly lured the richest men in
the world into the biggest scam of the century.
Interpretation
Arnold and Slack pulled off their stupendous con not by using a fake engineer or bribing Tiffany: All of the experts had been real. All of them honestly believed in the existence of the mine and in the value of the gems.
What had fooled them all was nothing else than Arnold and Slack themselves. The two men seemed to be such rubes, such hayseeds, so naive, that
no one for an instant had believed them capable of an audacious scam.
The prospectors had simply observed the law of appearing more stupid
than the mark-—the deceiver’s First Commandment.
The logistics of the con were quite simple. Months before Arnold and
Slack announced the “discovery” of the diamond mine, they traveled to
Europe, where they purchased some real gems for around $12,000 (part of
the money they had saved from their days as gold miners). They then
salted the “mine” with these gems, which the first expert dug up and
brought to San Francisco. The jewelers who had appraised these stones, in»
cluding Tiffany himself, had gotten caught up in the fever and had grossly
overestimated their value. Then Ralston gave the prospectors $l00,000 as
security, and immediately after their trip to New York they simply went to
Amsterdam, where they bought sacks of uncut gems, before ramming to
San Francisco. The second time they salted the mine, there were many
more jewels to be found.
The effectiveness of the scheme, however, rested not on tricks like
these but on the fact that Arnold and Slack played their parts to perfection.
On their trip to New York, where they mingled with millionaires and ty—
coons, they played up their clodhopper image, wearing pants and coats a
size or two too small and acting incredulous at everything they saw in the
big city. No one believed that these country simpletons could possibly be
conning the most devious, unscrupulous financiers of the time. And once
Harpending, Ralston, and even Rothschild accepted the mine’s existence,
anyone who doubted it was questioning the intelligence ofthe world’s most
successful businessmen.
In the end, Harpending’s reputation was mined and he never recovered; Rothschild learned his lesson and never fell for another con; Slack
took his money and disappeared from view, never to be found. Arnold
simply went home to Kentucky. After all, his sale of his mining rights had
been legitimate; the buyers had taken the best advice, and if the mine had
run out of diamonds, that was their problem. Arnold used the money to
greatly enlarge his farm and open up a bank of his own.
KEYS TO POWER
The feeling that someone else is more intelligent than we are is almost intolerable. We usually try to justify it in difierent ways: “He only has book
knowledge, whereas I have real knowledge.” “Her parents paid for her to
get a good education. If my parents had had as much money, if I had been
as privileged. . . .” “He’s not as smart as he thinks.” Last but not least: “She
may know her narrow little field better than I do, but beyond that she’s really not smart at all. Even Einstein was a boob outside physics.”
Given how important the idea of intelligence is to most people’s vanity, it is critical never inadvertently to insult or impugn a person’s brain
power. That is an unforgivable sin. But if you can make this iron rule work
for you, it opens up all sorts of avenues of deception. Sublirninally reassure
people that they are more intelligent than you are, or even that you are a
bit of a moron, and you can run rings around them. The feeling of intellee
tual superiority you give them will disarm their suspiciorrmuscles.
In 1865 the Prussian councillor Otto von Bismarck wanted Austria to
LAW 21 ;
I59
I60 3 LAW 2]
sign a certain treaty. The treaty was totally in the interests of Prussia and
against the interests of Austria, and Bismarck would have to strategize to
get the Ausmans to agree to it But the Austrian negotiator, Count Blorne,
was an avid cardplayer. His particular game was quinze, and he often said
that he could judge a man’s character by the way he played quinze. Bismarck knew of this saying of Blome’s.
The night before the negotiations were to begin, Bismarck innocently
engaged Blome in a
game of quinze. The Prussian would later write, “That
was the very last time I ever played quinze. I played so recklessly that
everyone was astonished. I lost several thousand talers [the currency of the
time], but I succeeded in fooling [Blome], for he believed me to be more
venturesome than I am and I
gave way.” Besides appearing reckless, Bismarck also played the witless fool, saying ridiculous things and bumbling
about with a
surplus of nervous energy.
All this made Blome feel he had gadiered valuable information. He
knew that Bismarck was aggressive———the Prussian already had that reputation, and the way he played had confirmed it. And aggressive men, Blome
knew, can be foolish and rash. Accordingly, when the time came to Sign
the treaty, Blome thought he had the advantage. A heedless fool like Bismarck, he thought, is incapable of cold—blooded calculation and deception,
so he only glanced at the treaty before signing it—he failed to read the fine
print. As soon as the ink was dry, a
joyous Bismarck exclaimed in his face,
“Well, I could never have believed that I should find an Austrian diplomat
willing to sign that document!”
The Chinese have a phrase, “Masqueracling as a swine to kill the
tiger.” This refers to an ancient hunting technique in which the hunter
clothes himself in the hide and snout of a pig, and mimics its grunting. The
mighty tiger thinks a pig is coming his way, and lets it get close, savoring
the prospect of an easy meal. But it is the hunter who has the last laugh.
Masquerading as a swine works wonders on those who, like tigers, are
arrogant and overconfident: The easier they think it is to prey on you, the
more easily you can turn the tables. This trick is also useful if you are ambitious yet find yourself low in the hierarchy: Appearing less intelligent than
you are, even a bit of a fool, is the perfect disguise. Look like a harmless pig
and no one will believe you harbor dangerous ambitions. They may even
promote you since you seem so likable, and subservient. Claudius before
he became emperor of Rome, and the prince of France who later became
Louis XIII, used this tactic when those above them suspected they might
have designs on the throne. By playing the fool as young men, they were
left alone. When the time came for them to strike, and to act with vigor and
decisiveness, they caught everyone oi?-guard.
Intelligence is the obvious quality to downplay, but why stop there?
Taste and sophistication rank close to intelligence on the vanity scale;
make people feel they are more sophisticated than you are and their guard
will come down. As Arnold and Slack knew, an air ofcomplete naiveté can
work wonders. Those fancy financiers were laughing at them behind their
backs, but who laughed loudest in the end? In general, then, always make
people believe they are smarter and more sophisticated than you are. They
will keep you around because you make them feel better about themselves,
and the longer you are around, the more opportunities you will have to do
ceive them.
I m a. g
e 2
The Opossum. In playing
dead, the opossum plays stupid.
Many a predator has therefore left it
alone. Who could believe that such an
ugly, unintelligent, nervous little creature
could be capable of such deception?
Authority: Know how to make use of stupidity: The wisest man
plays this card at times. There are occasions when the highest
wisdom consists in appearing not to know—you must not be ign0—
rant but capable of playing it. It is not much good being wise
among fools and sane among lunatics. He who poses as a fool is not
a fool. The best way to be well received by all is to clothe yourself
in the skin of the dumbest of brutes. (Baltasar Gracién, 1601-1658)
REVE RSA14
To reveal the true nature of your intelligence rarely pays; you should get in
the habit of downplaying it at all times. If people inadvertently learn the
truth—-that you are actually much smarter than you look--«they will admire
you more for being discreet than for making your brilliance show. At the
start of your climb to the top, of course, you cannot play too stupid: You
may want to let your bosses know, in a subtle way, that you are smarter
than the competition around you. As you climb the ladder, however, you
should to some degree try to dampen your brilliance.
There is, however, one situation where it pays to do the oppositewhen you can cover up a deception with a show of intelligence. In matters
of smarts as in most things, appearances are what count. If you seem to
have authority and knowledge, people will believe what you say. This can
be very useful in getting you out of a
scrape.
The art dealer Joseph Duveen was once attending a soirée at the New
York home of a
tycoon to whom he had recently sold a Diirer painting for
LAW 21 I51
I62 LAW ‘ll
a high price. Among the guests was a
young French art critic who seemed
extremely knowledgeable and confident. Wanting to impress this man, the
tyeoon’s daughter showed him the Diirer, which had not yet been hung.
The critic studied it for a time, then finally said, “You know, I don’t think
this Diirer is right.” He followed the young woman as she hurried to tell
her father what he had said, and listened as the magnate, deeply unsettled,
turned to Duveen for reassurance. Duveen just laughed. “How very amusing,” he said. “Do you realize, young man, that at least twenty other art experts here and in Europe have been taken in too, and have said that
painting isn’t genuine? And now you’ve made the same mistake.” His confident tone and air of authority intimidated the Frenchman, who apologized for his mistake.
Duveen knew that the art market was flooded with fakes, and that
many paintings had been falsely ascribed to old masters. He tried his best
to distinguish the real from the fake, but in his zeal to sell he often overplayed a work’s authenticity. What mattered to him was that the buyer believed he had bought a Diii-er, and that Duveen himself convinced
everyone of his “expertness” through his air of irreproachable authority,
Thus, it is important to be able to play the professor when necessary and
never impose such an attitude for its own sake.
LAW
22
USE THE SURRENDER
TACTIC: TRANSFORM
WEAKNESS INTO POWER
J UD G ME NT
When you are weaker, neverfightfor honor’: sake; choose
surrender instead. Surrender gives you time to recover;
time to torment and irritate your conqueror, time to wait
for his power to wane. Do not give him the satisfaction of
fighting and defeating you——surrenderfirst. By turning
the other cheek you infuriate and unsettle him. Make
surrender a tool ofpower.
153
‘lI‘1I".l‘|lI 'NI'Vl'| \7\l)
|‘I[la |'|(. '|‘l(|'l
A man who had
climbed upon (I certain
fig tree, was [muting
the banghs toward him
and plmrking the ripe
fruit, which he then
put mm his mouth to
(ie.rIrr>y and gnaw
with his hard teeth. The
vlzertnut. seeing this‘.
l().l’Se(l in’ long bt‘(ltu.'ht’.\'
and with ttnnultuotts
VILYIIL’ excluintell: "Oh
Fig! How much less
protected by zmture you
are than I. See how my
mien! offspring are set
in Close array,’/irst
clorhzrrl in soft wrappers over which is the
hard but softly lined
Itusk. Aml not mntenl
with this much care,
nature has also given
us these slmrp and
close-re! Sptne.s‘, so that
the hunt! ofman
rrammt hurt us.
"
Then tlmfig tree began
10 laugh. and after the
laug/tier it mitt: "You
know well that man is
0f.rm,h ingmttity that
he will berenve even
you of your children.
But in your ease he will
do it by metms of rods
and stones; and when
they are fellc-tl he will
trample them Wtfll his
feet or hit them With
.\fI)Il(‘,.\‘, so that your
of)‘;-prizzg will emerge
from their armor
crushed and niaimed.‘
while I am lutlched
carefully by his hands,
and never, like you,
with r0llgltflt’.XS. "
LLONARDQ DAVINCI.
14324519
164 LAW 22
TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW
The island of Melos is strategically situated in the heart of the Mediterranean. In classical times, the city of Athens dominated the sea and coastal
areas around Greece, but Sparta, in the Peloponnese, had been Mel0s’s
original colonizer. During the Peloponnesian War, then, the Melians refused to ally themselves with Athens and remained loyal to Mother Sparta.
In 416 B.C. the Athenians sent an expedition against Melos, Before launching an all—out attack, however, they dispatched a delegation to persuade the
Melians to surrender and become an ally rather than suffer devastation and
defeat.
“You know as well as we do,” the delegates said, “that the standard of
justice depends on the equality of power to compel, and that in fact the
strong do what they have the power to do and the weak accept what they
have to accept.” When the Melians responded that this denied the notion
of fair play, the Athenians said that those in power determined what was
fair and what was not. The Melians argued that this authority belonged to
the gods, not to mortals, “Our opinion of the gods and our knowledge of
men,” replied a member of the Athenian delegation, “lead us to conclude
that it is a general and necessary law of nature to rule whatever one can.”
The Melians would not budge. Sparta, they insisted, would come to
their defense. The Athenians countered that the Spartans were a conservative, practical people, and would not help Melos because they had nothing
to gain and a lot to lose by doing so.
Finally the Melians began to talk of honor and the principle ofresisting
brute force. “Do not be led astray by a false sense of honor,” said the Athenians. “Honor often brings men to ruin when they are faced with an obvious danger that somehow affects their pride. There is nothing disgraceful in
giving way to the greatest city in Hellas when she is offering you such reasonable terms.” The debate ended. The Melians discussed the issue among
themselves, and decided to trust in the aid of the Spartans, the will of the
gods, and the tightness of their cause. They politely declined the Athenians’
offer.
A few days later the Athenians invaded Melos. The Melians fought
nobly, even without the Spartans, who did not come to their rescue. It took
several attempts before the Athenians could surround and besiege their
main city, but the Melians finally surrendered. The Athenians wasted no
tirne—they put to death all the men ofmilitary age that they could capture,
they sold the women and children as slaves, and they re.-populated the is
land with their own colonists. Only a handful of Melians survived.
Interpretation
The Athenians were one of the most eminently practical people in history,
and they made the most practical argument they could with the Melians:
When you are weaker, there is nothing to be gained by fighting a useless
fight. No one comes to help the weak—by doing so they would only put
themselves in jeopardy. The weak are alone and must submit. Fighting
gives you nothing to gain but martyrdom, and in the process a lot of people
who do not believe in your cause will die.
Weakness is no sin, and can even become a strength if you learn how
to play it right. Had the Melians surrendered in the first place, they would
have been able to sabotage the Athenians in subtle ways, or might have
gotten what they could have out of the alliance and then left it when the
Athenians themselves were weakened, as in fact happened several years
later. Fortunes change and the mighty are often brought down. Surrender
conceals great power: Lulling the enemy into complacency, it gives you
time to recoup, time to undermine, time for revenge. Never sacrifice that
time in exchange for honor in a battle that you cannot win.
Weak people never give way when they ought to.
Cardinal tle R212, 16] 3-16 79
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
Sometime in the 19205 the German writer Bertolt Brecht became a convert
to the cause of Communism. From then on his plays, essays, and poems reflected his revolutionary fervor, and he generally tried to make his ideological statements as clear as possible. When Hitler came to power in
Germany, Brecht and his Communist colleagues became marked men. He
had many friends in the United States—Amerlcans who sympathized with
his beliefs, as well as fellow German intellectuals who had lied Hitler. In
1941, accordingly, Brecht emigrated to the United States, and chose to settle in Los Angeles, where he hoped to make a
living in the film business.
Over the next few years Brecht wrote screenplays with a pointedly an—
ticapitalist slant. He had little success in Hollywood, so in 1947, the war
having ended, he decided to return to Europe. That same year, however,
the US. Cong;ress’s House Un—American Activities Committee began its
investigation into supposed Communist infiltration in Hollywood. It began
to gather information on Brecht, who had so openly espoused Marxism,
and on September 19, 1947, only a month before he had planned to leave
the United States, he received a subpoena to appear before the committee.
In addition to Brecht, a number of other writers, producers, and directors
were summoned to appear as well, and this group came to be known as the
Hollywood 19.
Before going to Washington, the Hollywood 19 met to decide on a plan
of action. Their approach would be confrontational. Instead of answering
questions about their membership, or lack of it, in the Communist Party,
they would read prepared statements that would challenge the authority of
the committee and argue that its activities were unconstitutional. Even if
this strategy meant imprisonment, it would gain publicity for their cause.
Brecht disagreed. What good was it, he asked, to play the martyr and
gain a little public sympathy if in the process they lost the ability to stage
their plays and sell their scripts for years to come? He felt certain they were
Voltaire was living in
exile in London at :1
time when untifrenclr
3.-enrimem was in
its highest. One day
walking I/trough the
streets, he found himself
summnderl by an
tmgry crowd. “Ilrmg
him. Ilzmg the French
man,
”
llzagv yelled.
Voltaire calmly
adrlrresmrl the mob with
the following words:
"Men of England/ You
wish to kill mt‘ because
I am a Frmchman. Am
I no: ymnirhed enough
in not Ming ham an
Eirgléxhmarz? "
T/tr:
crowd charred /zis
thoughtful wnrrlx, and
escorted him safely
back m his lodgings.
ins, LITTLE. BROWN
noon or m+:n)o'rF.s.
CI.lF'l'().\' FADIMAN, I-.t)..
1985
LAW 22 I65
166 LAW 22
all more intelligent than the members of the committee. Why lower themselves to the level of their opponents by arguing with them? Why not out
fox the committee by appearing to surrender to it while subtly mocking it?
The Hollywood 19 listened to Brecht politely, but decided to stick to their
plan, leaving Brecht to go his own way.
The committee finally summoned Brecht on October 30. They expected him to do what others among the Hollywood 19 who had testified
before him had done: Argue, refuse to answer questions, challenge the
committee's right to hold its hearing, even yell and hurl insults. Much to
their surprise, however, Brecht was the very picture of Congeniality. He
wore a suit (something he rarely did), smoked a cigar (he had heard that
the committee chairman was a passionate cigar smoker), answered their
questions politely, and generally deferred to their authority.
Unlike the other witnesses, Brecht answered the question of whether
he belonged to the Communist Party: He was not a member, he said,
which happened to be the truth. One committee member asked him, “is it
true you have written a number of revolutionary plays?” Brecht had written many plays with overt Communist messages, but he responded, “I
have written a number of poems and songs and plays in the fight against
Hitler and, of course, they can be considered, therefore, as revolutionary
because I, of course, was for the overthrow of that government.” This state
ment went unchallenged.
Brecht’s English was more than adequate, but he used an interpreter
throughout his testimony, a tactic that allowed him to play subtle games
with language. When committee members found Communist leanings in
lines from English editions of his poems, he would repeat the lines in Ger
man for the interpreter, who would then retranslate them; and somehow
they would come out innocuous. At one point a committee member read
one of Brechfs revolutionary poems out loud in English, and asked him if
he had written it. “No,” he responded, “I wrote a German poem, which is
very different from this.” The author's elusive answers baffled the committee members, but his politeness and the way he yielded to their authority
made it impossible for them to get angry with him.
After only an hour of questioning, the committee members had had
enough. “Thank you very much,” said the chairman, “You are a good example to the {other} witnesses.” Not only did they free him, they offered to
help him ifhe had any trouble with immigration oficials who might detain
him for their own reasons. The following day, Brecht left the United States,
never to return.
Interpretation
The Hollywood 19’s confrontational approach won them a lot of sympa~
thy, and years later they gained a kind ofvindication in public opinion. But
they were also blacklisted, and lost valuable years of profitable working
time. Brecht, on the other hand, expressed his disgust at the committee
more indirectly. It was not that he changed his beliefs or compromised his
values; instead, during his short testimony, he kept the upper hand by ap-
pearing to yield while all the time running circles around the committee
with vague responses, outright lies that went unchallenged because they
were wrapped in enigmas, and word games. In the end he kept the freedom to continue his revolutionary writing (as opposed to suffering impris
onment or detainment in the United States), even while subtly mocking the
committee and its authority with his pseudo-obedience.
Keep in mind the following: People trying to make a show of their authority are easily deceived by the surrender tactic. Your outward sign of
submission makes them feel important; satisfied that you respect them,
they become easier targets for a later counterattack, or for the kind of indi»
rect ridicule used by Brecht. Measuring your power over time, never sacrifice long-term maneuverability for the short-lived glories ofmartyrdom.
When the great lord passes, the wise peasant bows deeply and silently farts.
Ethiopian prozuzllr
KEYS T0 POWER
What gets us into trouble in the realm of power is often our own overreac~
tion to the moves of our enemies and rivals. That overreaction creates
problems we would have avoided had we been more reasonable. It also
has an endless rebound effect, for the enemy then overreacts as well, much
as the Athenians did to the Melians. It is always our first instinct to react, to
meet aggression with some other kind of aggression. But the next time
someone pushes you and you find yourself starting to react, try this: Do not
resist or fight back, but yield, turn the other cheek, bend. You will find that
this often neutralizes their behavior——they expected, even wanted you to
react with force and so they are caught ofiguard and confounded by your
lack of resistance. By yielding, you in fact control the situation, because
your surrender is part of a
larger plan to lull them into believing they have
defeated you.
This is the essence of the surrender tactic: Inwardly you stay firm, but
outwardly you bend. Deprived of a reason to get angry, your opponents
will often be bewildered instead. And they are unlikely to react with more
violence, which would demand a reaction from you. Instead you are al
lowed the time and space to plot the countermoves that will bring them
down. In the battle of the intelligent against the brutal and the aggressive,
the surrender tactic is the supreme weapon. It does require self~control:
Those who genuinely surrender give up their freedom, and may be
crushed by the humiliation oftheir defeat You have to remember that you
only appear to surrender, like the animal that plays dead to save its hide.
We have seen that it can be better to surrender than to fight; faced with
a. more powerful opponent and a
sure defeat, it is often also better to surrender than to run away. Running away may save you for the time being,
but the aggressor will eventually catch up with you. you surrender instead, you have an opportunity to coil around your enemy and strike with
your fangs from close up.
LAW 22 167
I65 LAW 22
In 473 B.C., in ancient China, King Goujian of Yue suffered a horrible
defeat from the ruler of Wu in the battle of Fujiao. Goujian wanted to flee,
but he had an adviser who told him to surrender and to place himself in the
service of the ruler ofWu, from which position he could study the man and
plot his revenge. Deciding to follow this advice, Goujian gave the ruler all
of his riches, and went to work in his conqueror’s stables as the lowest servant. For three years he humbled himself before the ruler, who then, finally
satisfied of his loyalty, allowed him to return home. Inwardly, however,
Goujian had spent those three years gathering information and plotting revenge. When a terrible drought struck Wu, and the kingdom was weak
ened by irmer turmoil, he raised an army, invaded, and won with ease.
That is the power behind surrender: It gives you the time and the flexibility
to plot a devastating counterblow. Had Goujian run away, he would have
lost this chance.
When foreign trade began to threaten Japanese independence in the
mid—nineteenth century, the Japanese debated how to defeat the foreigners. One minister, Hotta Masayoshi, wrote a memorandum in 1857 that influenced Japanese policy for years to come: “I am therefore convinced that
our policy should be to conclude friendly alliances, to send ships to foreign
counhies everywhere and conduct trade, to copy the foreigners where they
are at their best and so repair our own shortcomings, to foster our national
strength and complete our armaments, and so gradually subject the foreigrr
ers to our influence until in the end all the countries of the world know the
blessings of perfect tranquillity and our hegemony is acknowledged
throughout the globe.” This is a brilliant application of the Law: Use surrender to gain access to your enemy. Learn his ways, insinuate yourself
with him slowly, outwardly conform to his customs, but inwardly maintain
your own culture. Eventually you will emerge victorious, for while he con—
siders you weak and inferior, and takes no precautions against you, you are
using the time to catch up and surpass him. This soft, penneable form of in»
vasion is often the best, for the enemy has nothing to react against, prepare
for, or resist. And had japan resisted Western influence by force, it might
well have suffered a devastating invasion that would have permanently altered its culture.
Surrender can also offer a way of mocking your enemies, of turning
their power against them, as it did for Brecht. Milan Kundera’s novel 7719
Jake, based on the author’s experiences in a penal camp in Czechoslovakia,
tells the story of how the prison guards organized a
relay race, guards
against prisoners. For the guards this was a chance to show off their physical superiority. The prisoners knew they were expected to lose, so they
went out of their way to oblige-—miming exaggerated exertion while
barely moving, running a few yards and collapsing, limping, jogging ever
so slowly while the guards raced ahead at full speed. Both by joining the
race and by losing ig they had obliged the guards obediently; but their
“overobedience” had mocked the event to the point of mining it. Overobedience—su.rrender—was here a way to demonstrate superiority in a reverse manner. Resistance would have engaged the prisoners in the cycle of
violence, lowering them to the guards’ level. Overobeying the guards, how»
ever, made them ridiculous, yet they could not rightly punish the prison»
ers, who had only done what they asked.
Power is always in flux—since the game is by nature fluid, and an arena
of constant struggle, those with power almost always find themselves eventually on the downward swing. If you find yourself temporarily weakened,
the surrender tactic is perfect for raising yourselfup again»-it disguises your
ambition; it teaches you patience and self—control, key skills in the game;
and it puts you in the best possible position for taking advantage ofyour uppressofs sudden slide. If you run away or fight back, in the long run you
cannot win. If you surrender, you will almost always emerge victorious.
Image: An Oak
Tree. The oak
that resists the
wind loses its
branches one
by one, and
with nothing
left to protect
it, the trunk finally snaps.
The oak that
bends lives longer, its trunk growing wider, its roots
deeper and more tenacious.
Authority: Ye have heard that it hath been said, An eye for an eye
and a tooth for a tooth: But I
say unto you, That ye resist not evil: but
whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other
also. And if any man will sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat,
let them have thy cloak also. And whosoever shall compel thee to
go a mile, go with him twain. (Jesus Christ, in Matthew 5:38-41)
LAW 22 169
170 LAW 22
R EVERSAI.
The point of surrendering is to save your hide for a later date when you
can reassert yourself. It is precisely to avoid martyrdom that one surrenders, but there are times when the enemy will not relent, and martyrdom
seems the only way out Furthermore, if you are willing to die, others may
gain power and inspiration from your example.
Yet martyrdom, surrender’s reversal, is a. messy, inexact tactic, and is
as violent as the aggression it combats. For every famous martyr there are
thousands more who have inspired neither a
religion nor a rebellion, so
that if martyrdom does sometimes grant a certain power, it does so unpredictably. More important, you will not be around to enjoy that power, such
as it is. And there is finally something selfish and arrogant about martyrs,
as if they felt their followers were less important than their own glory,
When power deserts you, it is best to ignore this Law’s reversal. Leave
martyrdom alone: The pendulum will swing back your way eventually,
and you should stay alive to see it.
23
CONCENTRATE
Y()[JR.F()R(3ES
JUDGMENT
Conserve your forces and energies by keeping them
concentrated at their strongest point. You gain more by
finding a rich mine and mining it deeper, than byflit—
tingfrom one shallow mine to another-—intensity dzfeats
extensity every time. When lookingfor sources ofpower to
elevate you, find the one key patnm, the_fat cow who will
give you milkfor a
long time to came.
12’!
TH} (.‘UU.<l; AND
Till’. IIOHSF
A game who was
plucking grass upon u
common thought
her.\'el_faffronter! by a
horse who fed near her;
mm’. in hi.\'.s'ing ll(‘L‘(Wll.\',
thus addressed him: “I
am certainly a more
noble and perfect
animal than yozr for
tin’ whole range and
extent afyourfarcrtlties
is confined to one
element. I can walk
upon the groom! as
well (:5 you,’ I have,
basidtas, wings, with
which I can raise
myself in the air; and
when I please. I can
sport on pomls and
lakes, and n7f*'.'Sh
myst,-ifin 1119 ‘ml
waters: 1 enfmirlle
dlffermzr powers Ufa
bird, (1 fish, am! a
qumiruped.
"
The horse, $tl(5!‘!§Izg
sonrrwhat distltzinjizliy.
replied: “I: is mic: you
inhabit three eiemems.
but you make no very
disrirzguisiieri/ignre in
any one ofthem. You
fly, imlerd; but your
flight is so heavy and
clmnsy, that Von luau-‘e
no right to put yourself
nn a level with the [ark
or the swallow. You can
swim on the surface of
the watch», but you
Ltmnoi live in them as
fishes r1o:you cannot
find yourfood in rho!
riemenl, norgfirlr
.\'nzoor?:1y (aitmg the
bottom of rite waves.
Ami when you walk, or
rather wtlcltlle, upon
the ground, with your
liroad fret and your
long neck xlretchred out,
TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW
In China in the early sixth century B.C., the kingdom of Wu began a was
with the neighboring norlhem provinces of the Middle Kingdom. Wu was
a. growing power, but it lacked the great history and civilization of the Mid
dle Kingdom, for centuries the center of Chinese culture. By defeating the
Middle Kingdom, the king of Wu would instantly raise his status.
The war began with great fanfare and several victories, but it soon
bogged down. A victory on one from would leave the Wu armies vulnera~
ble on another. The king’s chief minister and adviser, Wu Tzu-hsiu, warned
him that the barbarous state of Yueh, to the south, was beginning to notice
the kingdom of V\’u’s problems and had designs to invade. The king only
laughed at such w0rries~one more big victory and the great Middle King—
dom would be his.
In the year 490, Wu T212-hsiu sent his son away to safety in the kingdom of Ch’i. In doing so he sent the king a signal that he disapproved of
the war, and that he believed the king’s selfish ambition was leading Wu to
min. The king, sensing betrayal, lashed out at his minister, accusing him of
a lack of loyalty and, in a fit of anger, ordered him to kill himself. Wu Tzuhsiu obeyed his king, but before he plunged the knife into his chest, he
cried, “Tear out my eyes, oh King, and fix them on the gate ofWu, so that I
may see the triumphant entry of Yueh.”
As Wu Tzwlrsiu had predicted, within a few years a Yueh army passed
beneath the gate of Wu. As the barbarians surrounded the palace, the king
remembered his minister’s last Words-——~and felt the dead man’s disembodied eyes watching his disgrace. Unable to hear his shame, the king killed
himself, “covering his face so that he would not have to meet the reproaclr
ful gaze of his minister in the next world.”
Interpretation
The story of Wu is a paradigm of all the empires that have come to min by
overreachlng. Drunk with success and sick with ambition, such empires ex‘
pand to grotesque proportions and meet a min that is total. This is what
happened to ancient Athens, which lusted for the faraway island of Sicily
and ended up losing its empire. The Romans stretched the boundaries of
their empire to encompass vast territories; in doing so they increased their
vulnerability, and the chances of invasion from yet another barbarian tribe.
Their useless expansion led their empire into oblivion.
For the Chinese, the fate of the kingdom of Wu serves as an elemental
lesson on what happens when you dissipate your forces on several fronts,
losing sight of distant dangers for the sake ofpresent gain. “If you are not in
danger,” says Sun-tzu, “do not fight.” It is almost a physical law: What is
bloated beyond its proportions inevitably collapses. The mind must not
wander from goal to goal, or be distracted by success from its sense of purpose and proportion. What is concentrated, coherent, and connected to its
past has power. What is dissipated, divided, and distended rots and falls to
the ground. The bigger it bloats, the harder it falls.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW’
The Rothschild banking family had humble beginnings in the Jewish
ghetto of Frankfurt, Germany. The city‘s harsh laws made it impossible for
Jews to mingle outside the ghetto, but the Jews had turned this into a
virtuemit made them self—reliant, and zealous to preserve their culture at
all costs. Mayer Amschel, the first of the Rothschilds to accumulate wealth
by lending money, in the late eighteenth century, well understood the
power that comes from this kind of concentration and cohesion.
First, Mayer Amschel allied himself with one family, the powerful
princes of Thom und Taxis. Instead of spreading his services out, he made
himself these princes’ primary banker. Second, he entrusted none of his
business to outsiders, using only his children and close relatives. The more
unified and tight-knit the family, the more powerful it would become. Soon
Mayer Amschel’s five sons were running the business. And when Mayer
Amschel lay dying, in 1812, he refused to name a principal heir, instead setting up all of his sons to continue-the fa.mily' tradition, so that they would
stay united and would resist the dangers of dillusion and of infiltration by
outsiders.
Once Mayer Amschel’s sons controlled the family business, they decided that the key to wealth on a. larger scale was to secure a foothold in the
finances ofEurope as a whole, rather than being tied to any one country or
prince. Of the five brothers, Nathan had already opened up shop in London. In 1813 James moved to Paris. Amschel remained in Frankfurt,
Salomon established himself in Vienna, and Karl, the youngest son, went
to Naples. With each sphere of influence covered, they could tighten their
hold on Europe’s financial markets.
This widespread network, of course, opened the Rothschilds to the
very danger ofwhich their father had warned them: diliusion, division, dissension. They avoided this danger, and established themselves as the most
powerful force in European finance and politics, by once again resorting to
the strategy of the ghetto-——excluding outsiders, concentrating their forces.
The Rothschiids established the fastest courier system in Europe, allowing
them to get news of events before all their competitors. They held a virtual
monopoly on information. And their internal communications and correspondence were written in Frankfurt Yiddish, and in a code that only the
brothers could decipher. There was no point in stealing this information—-
no one could understand it. “Even the shewdest bankers cannot find their
way through the Rothschild maze,” admitted a financier who had tried to
infiltrate the clan.
In 1824 James Rothschild decided it was time to get married. This presented a problem for the Rothschilds, since it meant incorporating an outsider into the Rothschild clan, an outsider who could betray its secrets.
jarnes therefore decided to marry within the family, and chose the daughter of his brother Salomon. The brothers were ecstatic—~this was the perfect solution to their marriage problems. james‘s choice now became the
family policy: Two years later, Nathan married off his daughter to
fzissirig at ewrrvmze
who passes by, you
bring upon yourself the
deri5z'orx ofall belmiderr. I confess that I am
only formed to move
upon the ground, but
how graceful is my
rmzkef How well tumml
my lz'mb.r.’ How highly
finished my whole
burly! How great my
strength! Haw astonirhing my speed/I had
much rather be
confined to one
elerm-nt, and be
arlmirml m that, than
be 11 goose m 011.’”
mm lzs mom
um~r:At“cio .-mo
CHAUCER.
Du. .l<)H.N Arum,
l747~»lR22
Beware t)j'tIi.r.\'i[:aIiIig
your p(:wer.r: Xtriw:
consrmnly to concentrate (hem. Genius
I/rinks it can do wizarever it reps others
doing. but it is sure to
repent u/every illjutlgcd outlay.
JOEIANN VON Gm-:rmz.
1749-1832
LAW 23 I73
Ir-4 ‘
LAW 23
Salornon’s son. In the years to come, the five brothers arranged eighteen
matches among their cluldren, sixteen of these being contracted between
first cousins.
“We are like the mechanism of a watch: Each part is essential,” said
brother Salomon. As in a watch, every part of the business moved in concert with every other, and the inner workings were invisible to the world,
which only saw the movement of the hands. While other rich and powerful
families suffered irrecoverable downturns during the tumultons first half of
the nineteenth century, the tight-knit Rothschilds managed not only to preserve but to expand their unprecedented wealth.
Interpretation
The Rothschilds were born in strange times. They came from a place that
had not changed in centuries, but lived in an age that gave birth to the Industrial Revolution, the French Revolution, and an endless series of upheavals. The Rothchilds kept the past alive, resisted the patterns of
dispersion of their era and for this are emblematic of the law of concentration.
No one represents this better than _]ames Rothschild, the son who established himself in Paris. in his lifetime james witnessed the defeat of
Napoleon, the restoration of the Bourbon monarchy, the bourgeois monarchy of Orleans, the return to a
republic, and finally the enthronement of
Napoleo 1 III. French styles and fashions changed at a relentless pace during all this turmoil. Without appearing to be a relic of the past, James
steered his family as if the ghetto lived on within them. He kept alive his
clan’s inner cohesion and strength. Only through such an anchoring in the
past was the family able to thrive amidst such chaos. Concentration was the
foundation of the Rothschilds’ power, wealth, and stability.
The best stmzngy is always to be very strong; flrst in general, than
at the decisive point. . . . There is no higher and simpler law of strategy
than that afkeeping ones/brces concentrated. . . . In short the
first principle is: act with the utmost concentration.
011 War, Carl mm, fllausewitz, 1780-1831
KEYS TO POWER
The world is plagued by greater and geater division-——within countries,
political groups, families, even individuals. We are all in a state of total distraction and diffusion, hardly able to keep our minds in one direction before we are pulled in a thousand others. The modern world’s level of
conflict is higher than ever, and we have internalized it in our own lives.
The solution is a form of retreat inside ourselves, to the past, to more
concentrated forms of thought and action. As Schopenhauer wrote, “Intellect is a magnitude of intensity, not a magnitude of extensity.” Napoleon
knew the value of concentrating your forces at the enemy’s weakest spot——
it was the secret of his success on the battlefield. But his willpower and his
mind were equally modeled on this notion. Single-mindedness of purpose,
total concentration on the goal, and the use of these qualifies against peo
ple less focused, people in a state of distraction—such an arrow will find its
mark every time and overwhelm the enemy.
Casanova attributed his success in life to his ability to concentrate on a
single goal and push at it until it yielded. It was his ability to give himself
over completely to the women he desired that made him so intensely seducfive. For the weeks or months that one of these women lived in his
orbit, he thought of no one else. When he was imprisoned in the treacherous “leads” of the doge’s palace in Venice, a prison from which no one had
ever escaped, he concentrated his mind on the single goal of escape, day
after day. A change of cells, which meant that months of digging had all
been for naught, did not discourage him; he persisted and eventually escaped. “I have always believed,” he later wrote, “that when a man gets it
into his head to do something, and when he exclusively occupies himself in
that design, he must succeed, whatever the diliiculties. That man will become Grand Vizier or Pope.”
Concentrate C 1 a single goal, a single task, and beat it into submission.
In the world of power you will constantly need help from other people,
usually those more powerful than you. The fool flits from one person to another, believing that he will survive by spreading himself out. It is a corollary of the law of concentration, however, that much energy is saved, and
more power is attained, by affixing yourself to a single, appropriate source
of power. The scientist Nikola Tesla. mined himself by believing that he
somehow maintained his independence by not having to serve a single
master. He even turned down P. Morgan, who offered him a rich contract. In the end, Tesla’s “independence” meant that he could depend on
no single patron, but was always having to toady up to a dozen of them.
Later in his life he realized his mistake.
All the great Renaissance painters and writers wrestled with this problem, none more so than the sixteenth-century writer Pietro Aretino.
Throughout his life Aretino suffered the indignities of having to please this
prince and that. At last, he had had enough, and decided to woo Charles
V, promising the emperor the services of his powerful pen. He finally discovered the freedom that came from attachment to a single source of
power. Michelangelo found this freedom with Pope Julius II, Galileo with
the Medicis. In the end, the singie patron appreciates your loyalty and becomes dependent on your services; in the long run the master serves the
slave.
Finally, power itself always exists in concentrated forms. In any organization it is inevitable for a small youp to hold the strings. And often it is
not those with the titles. In the game of power, only the fool llails about
without fixing his target. You must find out who controls the operations,
who is the real director behind the scenes. As Richelieu discovered at the
beginning of his rise to the top of the French political scene during the
LAW 23 I75
I 76 LAW 23
early seventeenth century, it was not King Louis XIII who decided things,
it was the king’s mother. And so he attached himself to her, and catapulted
through the ranks of the courtiers, all the way to the top.
It is enough to strike oil once—your wealth and power are assured for
a lifetime.
Image: The Arrow. You cannot hit two targets
with one arrow. If your thoughts stray, you
miss the enemy’s heart. Mind and
arrow must become one. Only
with such concentration of
mental and physical
power can your arrow
hit the target and
pierce the
h e a r t.
Authority: Prize intensity more than extensity. Perfection re»
sides in quality, not quantity. Extent alone never rises above
mediocrity, and it is the misfortune of men with wide general
interests that while they would like to have their finger in every
pie, they have one in none. Intensity gives eminence, and rises
to the heroic in matters sublime. (Baltasar Gracian, 1601-1658)
REVERSAI.
There are dangers in concentration, and moments when dispersion is the
proper tactical move. Fighting the Nationalists for control of China, Mao
Tse~tung and the Communists fought a protracted war on several fronts,
using sabotage and ambush as their main weapons. Dispersal is often suitable for the weaker side; it is, in fact, a crucial principle of guerrilla warfare.
When fighting a stronger army, concentrating your forces only makes you
an easier ta.rget—better to dissolve into the scenery and frustrate your
enemy with the elusiveness of your presence.
Tying yourself to a single source ofpower has one preeminent danger:
If that person dies, leaves, or falls from grace, you suffer. This is what happened to Cesare Borgia, who derived his power from his father, Pope
Alexander VI. It was the pope who gave Cesare armies to fight with and
wars to wage in his name. When he suddenly died (perhaps from poison),
Cesare was as good as dead. He had made far too many enemies over the
years, and was now without his father’s protection. In cases when you may
need protection, then, it is ofien wise to entwine yourself around several
sources of power. Such a move would be especially prudent in periods of
great tumult and violent change, or when your enemies are numerous. The
more patrons and masters you serve the less risk you run if one of them
falls from power. Such dispersion will even allow you to play one off
against the other. Even if you concentrate on the single source of power,
you still must practice caution, and 1 cepare for the day when your master
or patron is no longer there to help you.
Finally, being too singlerminded in purpose can make you an intolera~
ble bore, especially in the arts. The Renaissance painter Paolo Uccello was
so obsessed with perspective that his paintings look lifeless and contrived.
Whereas Leonardo da Vinci interested himself in everything«-architecture, painting, warfare, sculpture, mechanics. Diffusion was the source of
his power. But such genius is rare, and the rest of us are better off erring on
the side of intensity.
LAW 23 1??’
24
PLAYITUEPERFECT
COUKHER
JUDGMENT
The perfect courtier thrives in a world where everything
revolves (mmml power and political dexterity. He has
mastered the art of 2'ndz‘rection; heflutters, yields to supe—
riors, and asserts power over others in the most oblique
and graceful mzmnex Learn and apply the laws of
ctourtiership and there will be no limit to howfaryou can
zise in the mun‘.
I78
‘
COURT .‘3(C)ClE'l‘Y
It is a fact of human nature that the structure of a court society forms itself
around power. In the past,‘ the court gathered around the ruler, and had
many functions: Besides keeping the ruler amused, it was a way to solidify
the hierarchy of royalty, nobility, and the upper classes, and to keep the
nobility both subordinate and close to the ruler, so that he could keep an
eye on them. The court serves power in many ways, but most of all it glorilles the ruler, providing him with a microcosmic world that must snuggle
to please him.
To be a courtier was a dangerous game. A nineteentl1—century Arab
traveler to the court of Darfur, in what is now Sudan, reported that
courtiers there had to do whatever the sultan did: If he were injured, they
had to suffer the same injury; if he fell off his horse during a hunt, they fell,
too. Mimicry like this appeared in couirs all over the world. More trouble
some was the danger of displeasing the ruler-—-one wrong move spelled
death or exile. The successful courtier had to walk a
tightrope, pleasing but
not pleasing too much, obeying but somehow distinguishing himself from
the other courtiers, while also never distinguishing himself so far as to
make the ruler insecure.
Great courtiers throughout history have mastered the science of manipulating people. They make the king feel more kingly; they make everyone else fear their power. They are magicians of appearance, knowing that
most things at court are judged by how they seem. Great coui-tiers are grate
citrus and polite; their aggression is veiled and indirect, Masters of the
word, they never say more than necessary, getting the most out of a cornpliment or hidden insult. They are magnets ofpleasure—people want to be
around them because they know how to please, yet they neither fawn nor
humiliate themselves. Great courtiers become the king’s favorites, enjoying
the benefits of that position. They often end up more powerful than the
ruler, for they are wizards in the accumulation of influence.
Many today dismiss court life as a relic of the past, a historical curiosity. They reason, according to Machiavelli, “as though heaven, the sun, the
elements, and men had changed the order of their motions and power, and
were different from what they were in ancient limes.” There may be no
more Sun Kings but there are still plenty ofpeople who believe the sun revolves around them. The royal court may have more or less disappeared,
or at least lost its power, but courts and courtlers still exist because power
still exists. A courtier is rarely asked to fall off a horse anymore, but the
laws that govern court politics are as timeless as the laws of power. There is
much to be leamed, then, from great courtiers past and present.
THE LAWS OF COURT POLITICS
Avoid Ostentation. Itis never prudent to prattle on about yourself or call
too much attention to your actions. The more you talk about your deeds
Till‘: T\\‘(> l3l)(«.«
Barlms-, the faithful
yard-dog who serves
his niurrcr zealously.
Izappmx to see hix old
zzcqimimuncc’ Juiljmc,
the curly lzapzlzrg, st'au.'a'
at the window on a
.vofr
down curlimlr. Siclling
_]'umlIy up it) hm; like u
child (0 u parczm, he all
but weeps with
cnmmm; and them
under the w1'mlnw, ha
whim-‘.s', wags his tail.
and bmmdx about.
"What sort oflife do
you lead, now‘.
loujozuka, ever since
the master’ took you
into his manvlan.’ You
remmzl-wr, no doubt.
how we uflen used to
suffer hunger our in the’
yard. What is your
prexmr service like? "
“I; would be a sin in
me to murmur againvl
my good farm/w.
"
answers .ll7ujImtku.
"':vl_v muster cmmol
make enough 0] max, I
live anudu riclws and
plenty, and I an! and
drink ojfsilver. I
frolic
with I/1{’ mastrr, and, if
I gez tired, I take my
elm: on u7rp€lS or rm (1
sofi couch.Anz1Iww do
you get em? "
“I? "
replica" Burbo.t_ letting
has mil dangle like :1
whip, zmcl hanging his
head. “I live“ as I Mel!
to do. 1 sufflar from
cold and hunger; and
Iwre. wlzilv gzmrclirzg
my rrzastcriv Ilatdste, I
have to sleep at me [our
ofrho wall, ("MI I get
drenched in the rain.
And iflbark at thiwrong time, I am
whip/)i'd. But how did
you. Jaujau, who were
LAW 24 179
so small and weak, gm‘
taken into favor, while
I
iump out ofmy skin
to no purpose?
What iv it you do? "
“
‘What is it you do?
'
A
pretty questirm to ask/”
replies! ./Uujllll. mockingly. “I walk upmz my
him! lugs. "
FABLFS,
lV/\N KRIl.()l~‘|‘.
17684844
It H‘ it wise’ thing to be
1,11)!/'Ir.'; mrtwquently, it
is a stupid thing to her
rude. To make reizmnies
by unnece try and
wilful nzcivil
as irzxanc a ])I‘(}CL((lI1[,’
as to sci your house on
fin’. For poIiIe*rws's is
like a muIzter—an
tlvowcrlly _/21/31’ cuin,
Wllh which it is frmlish
to be strrtgy. A scm‘il>l¢'
man will he j{(’.l1.t’.rUl{.\'
in line use of”. . . .Wax,
a .\‘lll7.\‘laI1( e uulumlly
hard and l7¥'i1llt’, can be
nzadr’ soft by 1hz:applzmrirm oft: little
warmth, so that it will
Irzkv any shape you
[)leusz'. In the same
way, by beilzg polite
and friendly. you can
make people plirzlilc
um] ulrliging. even
though they are apt to
be zrrabherl and malevolent. Henitc polircrmrs
is to human nature
what warmth is to wax.
ARTHUR
S(‘ll()PFNHAUl:R,
1788-1860
130 LAW 23
the more suspicion you cause. You also stir up enough envy among your
peers to induce treachery and backstabbing. Be careful, ever so careful, in
trumpeting your own achievements, and always talk less about yourself
than about other people. Modesty is generally preferable.
Practice Nonchalance. Never seem to be working too hard. Your talent
must appear to flow naturally, with an ease that makes people take you for
a genius rather than a workaholic. Even when something demands a lot of
sweat, make it look effortless——people prefer to not see your blood and toil,
which is another form of ostentation. It is better for them to marvel at how
gracefully you have achieved your accomplishment than to wonder why it
took so much work.
Be Frugal with Flattery. It may seem that your superiors cannot get
enough flattery, but too much of even a good thing loses its value. It also
stirs up suspicion among your peers. Learn to flatter indirectly—by downplaying your own contribution, for example, to make your master look better.
Arrange to Be Noticed. There is a. paradox: You cannot display yourself
too brazenly, yet you must also get yourself noticed. In the court of Louis
XIV, whoever the king decided to look at rose instantly in the court hierarchy. You stand no chance of rising if the ruler does not notice you in the
swamp of courtiers. This task requires much art. It is often initially a matter
of being seen, in the literal sense. Pay attention to your physical appearance, then, and find a way to create a dis1inctive—-a subtly distinctive-style
and image.
Alter Your Style and Language According to the Person You Are
Dealing With. The pseudo-belief in equa.lity——the idea that talking and
acting the same way with everyone, no matter what their rank, makes you
somehow a
paragon of civilization—is a terrible mistake. Those below you
will take it as a form of condescension, which it is, and those above you will
be ofiended, although they may not admit it. You must change your style
and your way of speaking to suit each person. This is not lying, it is acting,
and acting is an art, not a gift from God. Learn the art. This is also true for
the great variety of cultures found in the modern court: Never assume that
your criteria of behavior and judgment are universal. Not only is an inability to adapt to another culture the height of barbarism, it puts you at a disadvantage.
Never Be the Bearer of Bad News. The king kills the messenger who
brings bad news: This is a cliche but there is truth to it. You must struggle
and if necessary lie and cheat to be sure that the lot of the bearer of bad
news falls on a colleague, never on you. Bring only good news and your
approach will gladden your master.
Never Afiect Friendliness and Intimacy with Your Master. He does
not want a friend for a subordinate, he wants a subordinate. Never approach him in an easy, friendly way, or act as if you are on the best of
ten'ns—that is his prerogative. If he chooses to deal with you on this level,
assume a wary nhumminess. Otherwise err in the opposite direction, and
make the distance between you clear.
Never Criticize Those Above You Directly. This may seem obvious,
but there are often times when some sort of criticism is necessary—to say
nothing, or to give no advice, would open you to risks of another sort. You
must learn, however, to couch your advice and criticism as indirectly and as
politely as possible. Think twice, or three times, before deciding you have
made them sufficiently circuitous. Err on the side of subtlety and gentleness.
Be Frugal in Asking Those Above You for Favors. Nothing imitates a
master more than having to reject someone’s request It stirs up guilt and
resentment. Ask for favors as rarely as possible, and know when to stop.
Rather than making yourself the supplicant, it is always better to earn your
favors, so that the ruler bestows them willingly. Most important: Do not ask
for favors on another person’s behalf, least of all a friend’s.
Neverjoke About Appearances or Taste. A lively wit and a humorous
disposition are essential qualifies for a good courtier, and there are times
when vulgarity is appropriate and engaging. But avoid any kind of joke
about appearance or taste, two highly sensitive areas, especially with those
above you. Do not even try it when you are away from them. You will dig
your own grave.
Do Not Be the Court Cynic. Express admiration for the good work of
others. If you constantly criticize your equals or subordinates some of that
criticism will rub off on you, hovering over you like a
gray cloud wherever
you go. People will groan at each new cynical comment, and you will irn'~
tate them. By expressing modest admiration for other people’s achievements, you paradoxically call attention to your own. The ability to express
wonder and amazement, and seem like you mean it, is a rare and dying talent, but one still greatly valued.
Be Self-observant. The mirror is a miraculous invention; without it you
would commit great sins against beauty and decorum. You also need a mirror for your actions. This can sometimes come from other people telling
you what they see in you, but that is not the most trustworthy method: Ybu
must be the mirror, training your mind to try to see yourself as others see
you. Are you acting too obsequious? Are you trying too hard to please? Do
you seem desperate for attention, giving the impression that you are on the
decline? Be observant about yourself and you will avoid a mountain of
blunders.
LAW 24 ‘
131
182 LAW '24
Master Your Emotions. As an actor in a great play, you must learn to cry
and laugh on command and when it is appropriate. You must be able both
to disguise your anger and frustration and to fake your contentment and
agreement. You must be the master of your own face, Call it lying if you
like; but if you prefer to not play the game and to always be honest and upfront, do not complain when others call you obnoxious and arrogant.
Fit the Spirit of the Tunes. A slight affectation of a past era can be
charming, as long as you choose a period at least twenty years back; wearing the fashions of ten years ago is ludicrous, unless you enjoy the role of
court jester. Your spirit and way of thinking must keep up with the times,
even if the times offend your sensibilities. Be too forward-thinking, however, and no one will understand you. It is never a good idea to stand out
too much in this area; you are best off at least being able to mimic the spirit
of the times.
Be a Source of Pleasure. This is critical. It is an obvious law of human
nature that we will flee what is unpleasant and distasteful, while charm and
the promise of delight will draw us like moths to a flame. Make yourself the
flame and you will rise to the top. Since life is otherwise so full of unpleasantness and pleasure so scarce, you will be as indispensable as food and
drink. This may seem obvious, but what is obvious is often ignored or unappreciabed. There are degrees to this: Not everyone can play the role of
favorite, for not everyone is blessed with charm and wit. But we can all
control our unpleasant qualities and obscure them when necessary.
A man who knows the court is master of his gestures, qfhis eyes and
of his face; he is pmjrmml, imfienetrable; hr diisimulates bad offices,
smiles at his enemies, amtmls his inflation, disguises his passions,
belies his heart, speaks and acts against his feelings.
jam de La B‘r14y£'re, I645~]696
SCENES OF COURT Ll FE: Exemplary Deeds and Fatal Mistakes
Scene 1
Alexander the Great, conqueror of the Mediterranean basin and the Middle East through to India, had had the great Aristotle as his tutor and mentor, and throughout his short life he remained devoted to philosophy and
his master’s teachings. He once complained to Aristotle that during his
long campaigns he had no one with whom he could discuss philosophical
matters. Aristotle responded by suggesting that he take Callisthenes, a former pupil of Aristotle’s and a promising philosopher in his own right,
along on the next campaign.
Aristotle had schooled Callisthenes in the skills of being a courtier, but
the young man secretly scoffed at them. He believed in pure philosophy, in
Imadorned words, in speaking the naked truth. IfAlexander loved learning
so much, Callisthenes thought, he could not object to one who spoke his
mind. During one ofAlexander’s major campaigns, Callisthenes spoke his
mind one too many times and Alexander had him put to death.
Interpretation
In court, honesty is a fool’s game. Never be so self-absorbed as to believe
that the master is interested in your criticisms of him, no matter how accurate they are.
Scene II
Beginning in the Han Dynasty two thousand years ago, Chinese scholars
compiled a series ofwritings called the 27 Histories, an official biography of
each dynasty, including stories, statistics, census figures, and war chronicles. Each history also contained a chapter called “Unusual Events,” and
here, among the listings of earthquakes and floods, there would sometimes
suddenly appear descriptions of such bizarre manifestations as two—headed
sheep, geese flying backward, stars suddenly appearing in different parts of
the sky, and so on. The earthquakes could be historically verified, but the
monsters and weird natural phenomena were clearly inserted on purpose,
and invariably occurred in clusters. What could this mean?
The Chinese emperor was considered more than a man—he was a
force of nature. His kingdom was the center of the universe, and everything revolved around him. He embodied the world’s perfection. To criticize him or any of his actions would have been to criticize the divine order.
No minister or courtier dared approach the emperor with even the slightest
cautionary word. But emperors were fallihle and the kingdom suffered
greatly by their mistakes. Inserting sightings of strange phenomena into the
court chronicles was the only way to warn them. The emperor would read
of geese flying backward and moons out of orbit, and realize that he was
being cautioned. His actions were unbalancing the universe and needed to
change.
interpretation
For Chinese courtiers, the problem of how to give the emperor advice was
an important issue. Over the years, thousands of them had died trying to
warn or counsel their master. To be made safely, their criticisms had to be
indirect--yet if they were ton indirect they would not be heeded. The
chronicles were their solution: Identify no one person as the source of criti«
cism, make the advice as impersonal as possible, but let the emperor know
the gravity of the situation.
Your master is no longer the center of the universe, but he still imagines that everything revolves around him. When you criticize him he sees
the person criticizing, not the criticism itself. Like the Chinese courtiers,
you must find a way to disappear behind the warning. Use symbols and
other indirect methods to paint a picture of the problems to come, without
putting your neck on the line.
LAW 24
‘
183
I84 LAW 24
Scene III
Early in his career, the French architect Jules Mansart received commissions to design minor additions to Versailles for King Louis XIV. For each
design he would draw up his plans, making sure they followed Louis’s instructions closely. He would then present them to His Majesty.
The courtier Saint-Simon described MansaIt’s technique in dealing
with the king: “His particular skill was to show the king plans that pur»
posely included something imperfect about them, often dealing with the
gardens, which were not Mansart’s specialty. The king, as Mansart expected, would put his finger exactly on the problem and propose how to
solve it, at which point Mansart would exclaim for all to hear that he would
never have seen the problem that the king had so masterfully found and
solved; he would burst with admiration, confessing that next to the king he
was but a
lowly pupil.” At the age of thirty, having used these methods
time and time again, Mansart received a prestigious royal commission: Al:
though he was less talented and experienced than a number of other
French designers, he was to take charge of the enlargement of Versailles.
He was the king’s architect from then on.
Interpretation
As a
young man, Mansart had seen how many royal craftsmen in the sen
vice of Louis XIV had lost their positions not through a lack of talent but
through a costly social blunder. He would not make that mistake. Mansart
always strove to make Louis feel better about himself, to feed the king’s
vanity as publicly as possible.
Never imagine that skill and talent are all that matter. In court the
courtier’s art is more important than his talent; never spend so much time
on your studies that you neglect your social skills. And the greatest skill of
all is the ability to make the master look more talented than those around
him.
Scene IV
Jean-Baptiste Isabey had become the unofficial painter of the Napoleonic
court. During the Congress of Vienna in 1814, after Napoleon, defeated,
had been imprisoned on the island of Elba, the participants in these meetings, which were to decide the fate of Europe, invited Isabey to immortalize the historic events in an epic painting.
When Isabey arrived in Vienna, Talleyrand, the main negotiator for
the French, paid the artist a visit. Considering his role in the proceedings,
the statesman explained, he expected to occupy center stage in the painting. Isabey cordially agreed. A few days later the Duke of Wellington, the
main negotiator for the English, also approached Isabey, and said much
the same thing that Talleyrand had. The ever polite Isabey agreed that the
great duke should indeed he the center of attention.
Back in his studio, Isabey pondered the dilemma. If he gave the spotlight to either of the two men, he could create a diplomatic rift, stirring up
all sorts of resentment at a time when peace and concord were critical.
When the painting was finally unveiled, however, both Talleyrand and
Wellington felt honored and satisfied. The work depicts a
large hall filled
with diplomats and politicians from allover Europe. 011 one side the Duke
of Wellington enters the room, and all eyes are turned toward him; he is
the “center” of attention. In the very center of the painting, meanwhile, sits
Talleyiand.
Interpretafion
It is often very difficult to satisfy the master, but to satisfy two masters in
one stroke takes the genius of a great courtier. Such predicaments are comw
mon in the life of a courtier: By giving attention to one master, he displeases another. You must find a way to navigate this Scylla and Charybdis
safely. Masters must receive their due; never inadvertently stir up the re
sentment of one in pleasing another.
Scene V
George Brummell, also known as Beau Brummell, made his mark in the
late 1700s by the supreme elegance of his appearance, his popularization of
shoe buckles (soon imitated by all the dandies). and his clever way with
words. His London house was the fashionable spot in town, and Brunnnell
was the authority on all matters of fashion. If he disliked your footwear,
you immediately got rid of it and bought whatever he was wearing. He perfected the art of tying a cravat; Lord Byron was said to spend many a night
in front of the mirror trying to figure out the secret behind Brummell’s perfect knots.
One of Brummell’s greatest admirers was the Prince of Wales, who
fancied himself a fashionable young man. Becoming attached to the
prince’s court (and provided with a
royal pension), Brummell was soon so
sure of his‘ own authority there that he took to joking about the prince’s
weight, referring to his host as Big Ben. Since trimness of figure was an im~
portant quality for a. dandy, this was a withering criticism. At dinner once,
when the service was slow, Brummell said to the prince, “Do ting, Big
Ben” The prince rang, but when the valet arrived he ordered the man to
show Brummell the door and never admit him again.
Despite falling into the prince’s disfavor, Brummell continued to treat
everyone around him with the same arrogance. Without the Prince of
Wales’ patronage to support him, he sank into horrible debt, but he main
tained his insolent manners, and everyone soon abandoned him. He died
in the most pitiahle poverty, alone and deranged.
Interpretation
Beau Brummell’s devastating wit was one of the qualifies that endeared
him to the Prince ofWales. But not even he, the arbiter of taste and fashion,
could get away with a
joke about the prince’s appearance, least of all to his
face. Neverjoke about a person’s plumpness, even indirectly—and particu*
larly when he is your master. The poorhouses ofhistory are filled with people who have made such jokes at their master’s expense.
LAW 24
‘
185
1.516 LAW 24
Scene VI
Pope Urban VIII wanted to be remembered for his skills in writing poetry,
which unfortunately were mediocre at best. In 1629 Duke Francesco
d’Este, knowing the pope’s literary pretensions, sent the poet Fulvio Testi
as his ambassador to the Vatican. One of Tes|i’s letters to the duke reveals
why he was chosen: “Once our discussion was over, I kneeled to depart,
but His Holiness made a signal and walked to another room where he
sleeps, and after reaching a small table, he grabbed at bundle of papers and
thus, turning to me with a
smiling face, he said: ‘We want Your Lordship to
listen to some of our compositions.’ And, in fact, he read me two very long
Pindaric poems, one in praise of the most hoiy Virgin, and the other one
about Countess Matilde.”
We do not know exactly what Testi thought of these very long poems,
since it would have been dangerous for him to state his opinion freely,
even in a letter. But he went on to write, “I, following the mood, commented on each line with the needed praise, and, after having kissed His
Holiness’s foot for such an unusual sign of benevolence [the reading of the
poetry], I left.” Weeks later, when the duke himself visited the pope, he
managed to recite entire verses of the pope’s poetry and praised it enough
to make the pope “so jubilant he seemed to lose his mind.”
Interpretation
In matters of taste you can never be too obsequious with your master. Taste
is one of the ego’s pxickliest parts; never impugn or question the master’s
taste-——his poetry is sublime, his dress impeccable, and his manner the
model for all.
_ Scene VII
One afternoon in ancient China, Chao, ruler of Han from 358 to 333 B.C.,
got drunk and fell asleep in the palace gardens. The court crown-keeper,
whose sole task was to look after the ruler’s head apparel, passed through
the gardens and saw his master sleeping without a coat. Since it was getting
cold, the crowrrkeeper placed his own coat over the ruler, and left.
When Chan awoke and saw the coat upon him, he asked his axten»
‘
dants, “Who put more clothes on my body?” “The crowmkeeper,” they
replied. The ruler immediately called for his ofiicial coat—keeper and had
him punished for neglecting his duties. He also called for the crownkeeper, whom he had beheaded.
Interpretation
Do not overstep your bounds. Do what you are assigned to do, to the best
of your abilities, and never do more. To think that by doing more you are
doing better is a common blunder. It is never good to seem to be trying too
ha.rd——-it is as if you were covering up some deficiency. Fulfilling a task that
has not been asked ofyoujust makes people suspicious. Ifyou are a crownkeeper, be a
crowmkeeper. Save your excess energy for when you are not
in the court.
Scene VIII
One day, for amusement, the Italian Renaissance painter Fra Filippo Lippi
(1406-1469) and some friends went sailing in a small boat off Ancona.
There they were captured by two Moorish galleys, which hauled them off
in chains to Barbary, where they were sold as slaves. For eighteen long
months Filippo toiled with no hope ofreturning to Italy.
On several occasions Filippo saw the man who had bought him pass
by, and one day he decided to sketch this man’s portrait, using burnt
coal~charcoal—from the fire. Still in his chains, he found a white wall,
where he drew a
full—length likeness of his owner in Moorish clothing. The
owner soon heard about this, for no one had seen such skill in drawing before in these parts; it seemed like a miracle, 3. gift from God. The drawing
so pleased the owner that be instantly gave Filippo his freedom and em—
ployed him in his court. All the big men on the Barbary coast came to see
the magnificent color portraits that Fra Filippo then proceeded to do, and
finally, in gratitude for the honor in this way brought upon him, Filippcfs
owner returned the artist safely to Italy.
lnterpretation
We who toil for other people have all in some way been captured by pirates and sold into slavery. But like Fra Filippo (if to a lesser degree), most
of us possess some gift, some talent, an ability to do something better than
other people. Make your master a gift of your talents and you will rise
above other courtiers. Let him take the credit if necessary, it will only be
temporary: Use him as a stepping stone, a way of displaying your talent
and eventually buying your freedom from enslavernent.
Scene IX
Alfonso I of Aragon once had a servant who told the king that the night
before he had had a dream: Alfonso had given him a gift of weapons,
horses, and clothes. Alfonso, a
generous, lordly man, decided it would be
amusing to make this dream come true, and promptly gave the servant
exactly these gifts.
A little while later, the same servant announced to Alfonso that he had
had yet another dream, and in this one Alfonso had given him a considerable pile of gold florins. The king smiled and said, “Don't believe in
dreams from now on; they lie.”
interpretation
In his treatment of the servant’s first dream, Alfonso remained in control.
By making a dream come true, he claimed a godlike power for himself, if
in a mild and humorous way. In the second dream, however, all appearance of magic was gone; this was nothing but an ugly con game on the set»
vant’s part. Never ask for too much, then, and know when to stop. It is the
master’s prerogative to give——to give when he wants and what he wants,
and to do so without prompting. Do not give him the chance to reject your
requests. Better to win favors by deserving them, so that they are bestowed
without your asking.
LAW 24 157
18!?
‘
LAW 24
Scene X
The great English landscape painter M. W. Turner (1775-1851) was
known for his use of color, which he applied with a brilliance and a strange
iridescence. The color in his paintings was so striking, in fact, that other
artists never wanted his work hung next to theirs: It inevitably made everything around it seem dull.
The painter Sir Thomas Lawrence once had the misfortune of seeing
Turner’s masterpiece Cologne hanging in an exhibition between two works
of his own. Lawrence complained bitterly to the gallery owner, who gave
him no satisfaction: After all, someone’: paintings had to hang next to
Tumer’s. But Turner heard of Lawrence’s complaint, and before the exhibition opened, he toned down the brilliant golden sky in Cologne, making it as
dull as the colors in Lawrence’s works. A friend of Tumer’s who saw the
painting approached the artist with a horrified look: “What have you done
to your picture!” he said. “Well, poor Lawrence was so unhappy,” Turner
replied, “and it’s only lampblack. It’ll wash off after the exhibition.”
Interpretation
Many of a courtier’s anxieties have to do with the master, with whom most
dangers lie. Yet it is a mistake to imagine that the master is the only one to
determine your fate. Your equals and subordinates play integral parts also.
A court is a vast stew ofresentments, fears, and powerful envy. You have to
placate everyone who might someday harm you, deflecting their resentment and envy and diverting their hostility onto other people.
Turner, eminent courtier, knew that his good fortune and fame de
pended on his fellow painters as well as on his dealers and patrons. How
many of the great have been felled by envious colleagues! Better temporarily to dull your brilliance than to suffer the slings and arrows of envy.
Scene XI
Winston Churchill was an amateur artist, and after World War II his paintings became collector’s items. The American publisher Henry Luce, in
fact, creator of Time and L2)? magazines, kept one of Churchill’s landscapes
hanging in his private office in New York.
On a tour through the United States once, Churchill visited Luce in his
office, and the two men looked at the painting together. The publisher remarked, “It’s a good picture, but I think it needs something in the foreground-—a sheep, perhaps.” Much to Luce’s horror, Churcl1ill’s secretary
called the publisher the next day and asked him to have the painting sent
to England. Luce did so, mortified that he had perhaps offended the former
prime minister. A few days later, however, the painting was shipped back,
but slightly altered: a single sheep now grazed peacefully in the fore
ground.
Interpretation
In stature and fame, Churchill stood head and shoulders above Luce, but
Luce was certainly a man of power, so let us imagine a
slight equality between them. Still, what did Churchill have to fear from an American pub
lisher? Why bow to the criticism of a dilettante?
A court-—-in this case the entire world of diplomats and international
statesmen, and also of the journalists who court them--is a place of mutual
dependence. It is unwise to insult or olifend the taste of people of power,
even ifthey are below or equal to you. If 3. man like Churchill can swallow
the criticisms of a man like Luce, he proves himself a courtier without peer.
(Perhaps his correction of the painting implied a certain condescension as
well, but he did it so subtly that Luce did not perceive any slight.) lmitate
Churchill: Put in the sheep. It is always beneficial to play the obliging
courtier, even when you are not serving a master.
THE DELEGATE GAME OF COURTIERSHIP: A Warning
Talleyraud was the consummate courtier, especially in serving his master
Napoleon. When the two men were first getting to know each other,
Napoleon once said in passing, “I shall come to lunch at your house one of
these days.” Talleyrancl had a house at Auteuil, in the suburbs of Paris. “I
should be delighted, man général,” the minister replied, “and since my
house is close to the Bois de Boulogne, you will be able to amuse yourself
with a bit of shooting in the afternoon.”
“I do not like shooting,” said Napoleon, “But I love hunting. Are there
any boars in the Bois de Boulogne?” Napoleon came from Corsica, where
boar hunting was a great sport. By asking if there were boars in at Paris
park, he showed himself still a. provincial, almost a tube. Talleyrand did not
laugh, however, but he could not resist a practical joke on the man who
was now his master in politics, although not in blood and nobility, since
Talleyrand came from an old aristocratic family. To Napoleorfs question,
then, he simply replied, “Very few, man généml, but I dare say you will manage to find one.”
It was arranged that Napoleon would arrive at Talleyrand’s house the
following day at seven AM. and would spend the morning there. The “boar
hunt” would take place in the afternoon. Throughout the morning the excited general talked nothing but boar hunting. Meanwhile, Talleyrand see
cretly had his servants go to the market, buy two enormous black pigs, and
take them to the great park.
After lunch, the hunters and their hounds set off for the Bois de
Boulogne. At a secret signal from Talleyrand, the servants loosed one of the
pigs. “I see a boar,” Napoleon cried joyfully, jumping onto his horse to give
chase. Talleyrand stayed behind. It took half an hour of galloping through
the park before the “boat” was finally captured. At the moment oftriumph,
however, Napoleon was approached by one of his aides, who knew the
creature could not possibly be at boar, and feared the general would be
ridiculed once the story got out: “Sir,” he told Napoleon, “you realize of
course that this is not a bear but a pig.”
Flying into a
rage, Napoleon immediately set off at a gallop for Talleyrand’s house. He realized along the way that he would now be the butt
of many a
joke, and that exploding at Talleyrand would only make him
LAW 24
'
199
190 LAW 24
more ridiculous; it would be better to make a show ofgood humor. Still, he
did not hide his displeasure well.
Talleyrand decided to try to soothe the general’s bruised ego. He told
Napoleon not to go back to Paris yet-«he should again go hunting in the
park. There were many rabbits there, and hunting them had been a. favorite pastime of Louis XVI. Talleyrand even offered to let Napoleon use a
set of guns that had once belonged to Louis. With much flattery and cajol—
ery, he once again got Napoleon to agree to a hunt.
The party left for the park in the late afternoon. Along the way,
Napoleon told Talleyrand, “Pm not Louis XVI, I surely won’t kill even one
rabbit.” Yet that afternoon, strangely enough, the park was teeming with
rabbits. Napoleon killed at least fifty of them, and his mood changed from
anger to satisfaction. At the end of his wild shooting spree, however, the
same aide approached him and whispered in his ear, “To tell the truth, sir, I
am beginning to believe these are not wild rabbits. I
suspect that rascal T31»
leyrand has played another joke on us.” (The aide was right: Talleyrand
had in fact sent his servants back to the market, where they had purchased
dozens ofrabbits and then had released them in the Bois de Boulogne.)
Napoleon immediately mounted his horse and galloped away, this
time returning straight to Paris. He later threatened Talleyrand, warned
him not to tell a soul what had happened; if he became the laughingstock
ofParis, there would be hell to pay.
It took months for Napoleon to be able to trust Talleyrand again, and
he never totally forgave him his humiliation.
Interpretation
Courtiers are like magicians: They deceptively play with appearances,
only letting those around them see what they want them to see. With so
much deception and manipulation afoot, it is essential to keep people from
seeing your tricks and glimpsing your sleight ofhand.
Talleyrand was normally the Grand Vlfizard of Courtiership, and but
for Napoleoifs aide, he probably would have gotten away completely with
both pleasing his master and having a
joke at the generafs expense. But
courtiership is a subtle art, and overlooked traps and inadvertent mistakes
can ruin your best tricks. Never risk being caught in your maneuvers;
never let people see your devices. If that happens you instantly pass in peo
ple’s perceptions from a courtier of great manners to a loathsome rogue. It
is a delicate game you play; apply the utmost attention to covering your
tracks, and never let your master unmask you.
LAW
25
RE~CREATE YOURSELF
jUDGMEN'I‘
Do net accept the roles that society foists on you.
Re-create yourself by forging a new identity, one that
commands attention and never bores the audience. Be
the master ofyour own image rather than letting others
define itjbr yaw. Inemyzmate dramatic devices into your
public gestures and actionswyour power will be enhanced and your character will seem larger than li e.
1 791
The man who intend;
[0 make 1111.: fortune in
this anciem capfml of
the world [Rome] mam
be a chameleon .m.s'ceprible of reflecting the
colors afthe azmo~
sphere that mrrnunzls
him—-(1 Proteus apt to
assume every fomz,
every shape. He must
be supple, flexible,
insinuating, close,
inscrutable, often base,
sometimes sincere.
somesimes perfidious,
always concealing a
par! of his knowledge,
indulging in but one
tone of voice, patient,
a perfect master ofhis
UWII COIJIUEHGIICE’, 05‘
cold at ice when any
other man would be all
fire; and if unforzw
rrdtely he is not religious
at heart—a very
common occurrence
for a soul possessing
the above requisiteshe must have religion
in his mind, that is to
Say, on his face, on his
lips, in his manners; he
must suffer quie1l_v, if
he be an honest man,
the necessity ofknowing himself an armnz
hypocrite. The man
whoxe sou! would
loathe such a life
should leave Rome and
seek his fortune elsewhere. I do not know
whether I am praising
or excusing myself’, but
of all those quahtiex I
possesred but onenamely, flexibility.
MEMOIRS,
GIOVANNI CASANOVA,
17254798
192 LAW 25
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW I
Julius Caesar made his first significant mark on Roman society in 65 B.C.,
when he assumed the post of aedile, the official in charge of grain distribution and public games. He began his entrance into the public eye by orga~
nizing a series of carefully crafted and well~timed spectac|es——wi1d—beast
hunts, extravagant gladiator shows, theatrical contests. On several occasions, he paid for these spectacles out of his own pocket. To the common
man, Julius Caesar became indelibly associated with these muclrloved
events. As he slowly rose to attain the position of consul, his popularity
among the masses served as the foundation of his power. He had created
an image of himself as a
great public showman.
In 49 B.C., Rome was on the brink of a civil war between rival leaders,
Caesar and Pompey. At the height of the tension, Caesar, an addict of the
stage, attended a theatrical performance, and afterward, lost in thought, he
wandered in the darkness back to his camp at the Rubicon, the rivet that
divides Italy from Gaul, where he had been campaigning. To march his
army back into Italy across the Rubicon would mean the beginning of a
war with Pompey.
Before his staff Caesar argued both sides, forming the options like an
actor on stage, a. precursor of Hamlet. Finally, to put his soliloquy to an
end, he pointed to a seemingly innocent appaxition at the edge of the
river——a very tall soldier blasting a call on a
trumpet, then going across a
bridge over the Rubicon————a.nd pronounced, “Let us accept this as a sign
from the Gods and follow where they beckon, in vengeance on our double»
dealing enemies. The die is cast.” All of this he spoke portentously and dramatically, gesturing toward the river and looking his generals in the eye.
He knew that these generals were uncertain in their support, but his oratory overwhelmed them with a sense of the drama of the moment, and of
the need to seize the time. A more prosaic speech would never have had
the same effect. The generals rallied to his cause; Caesar and his army
crossed the Rubicon and by the following year had vanquished Pompey,
making Caesar dictator of Rome.
In warfare, Caesar always played the leading man with gusto. He was
as skilled a horseman as any of his soldiers, and took pride in outdoing
them in feats of bravery and endurance, He entered battle astzide the
strongest mount, so that his soldiers would see him in the thick of battle,
urging them on, always positioning himself in the center, a godlike symbol
of power and a model for them to follow, Of all the armies in Rome, Caesar’s was the most devoted and loyal. His soldiers, like the common people
who had attended his entertainments, had come to identify with him and
with his cause.
After the defeat ofPompey, the entertainments grew in scale. Nothing
like them had ever been seen in Rome. The chariot races became more
spectacular, the gladiator fights more dramatic, as Caesar staged fights to
the death among the Roman nobility. He organized enormous mock naval
battles on an artificial lake. Plays were performed in every Roman ward. A
giant new theater was built that sloped dramatically down the Tarpeian
Rock. Crowds from all over the empire flocked to these events, the roads to
Rome lined with visitors’ tents. And in 45 B.C., timing his entry into the city
for maximum effect and surprise, Caesar brought Cleopatra back to Rome
after his Egyptian campaign, and staged even more extravagant public
spectacles.
These events were more than devices to divert the masses; they dra~
matically enhanced the public’s sense of Caesar’s character, and made him
seem larger than life. Caesar was the master of his public image, of which
he was forever aware. When he appeared before crowds he wore the most
spectacular purple robes. He would be upstaged by no one. He was notoriously vain about his appearance—it was said that one reason he enjoyed
being honored by the Senate and people was that on these occasions he
could wear a laurel wreath, hiding his baldness. Caesar was a masterful orator. He knew how to say a lot by saying a little, intuited the moment to
end a speech for maximum effect. He never failed to incorporate a surprise
into his public appearances—a startling announcement that would
heighten their drama.
Immensely popular among the Roman people, Caesar was hated and
feared by his rivals. On the ides of March——March 15—in the year 44 B.C.,
a group of conspirators led by Brutus and Cassius surrounded him in the
senate and stabbed him to death. Even dying, however, he kept his sense of
drama. Drawing the top of his gown over his face, he let go of the cloth’s
lower part so that it draped his legs, allowing him to die covered and decent. According to the Roman historian Suetonius, his final words to his
old friend Brutus, who was about to deliver a second blow, were in Greek,
and as if rehearsed for the end of a play: “You too, my child?”
Interpretation
The Roman theater was an event for the masses, attended by crowds
unimaginable today. Packed into enormous auditoriums, the audience
would be amused by raucous comedy or moved by high tragedy. Theater
seemed to contain the essence of life, in its concentrated, dramatic form.
Like a
religious ritual, it had a powerful, instant appeal to the common
man.
Julius Caesar was perhaps the first public figure to understand the vital
link between power and theater. This was because of his own obsessive in»
terest in drama. He sublimated this interest by making himself an actor and
director on the world stage. He said his lines as if they had been scripted;
he gestured and moved through a crowd with a constant sense of how he
appeared to his audience. He incorporated surprise into his repertoire,
building drama into his speeches, staging into his public appearances. His
gestures were broad enough for the common man to grasp them instantly.
He became immensely popular.‘
Caesar set the ideal for all leaders and people of power. Like him, you
must leam to enlarge your actions through dramatic techniques such as
LAW 25 19.?
194 L AW 25
surprise, suspense, the creation of sympathy, and symbolic identification.
Also like him, you must be constantly aware of your audience——of what
will please them and what will bore them. You must arrange to place yourself at the center, to command attention, and never to be upstaged at any
cost.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW II
In the year 1831, a
young woman named Aurore Dupin Dudevant left her
husband and family in the provinces and moved to Paris. She wanted to be
a writer; marriage, she felt, was worse than prison, for it left her neither the
time nor the freedom to pursue her passion. In Paris she would establish
her independence and make her living by writing.
Soon after Dudevant arrived in the capital, however, she had to con
front certain harsh realities. To have any degree of freedom in Paris you
had to have money. For a woman, money could only come through mar»
rlage or prostitution. No woman had ever come close to making a
living by
writing. Women wrote as a hobby, supported by their husbands, or by an
inheritance. In fact when Dudevant first showed her writing to an editor,
he told her, “You should make babies, Madame, not literature,”
Clearly Dudevant had come to Paris to attempt the impossible. In the
end, though, she came up with a
strategy to do what no woman had ever
donew-a strategy to re-create herself completely, forging a public image of
her own making. Women writers before her had been forced into a
readymade role, that of the second-rate arfist who wrote mostly for other
women. Dudevant decided that if she had to play a role, she would turn the
game around: She would play the part of a man.
In 1832 a publisher accepted Dudevanfs first major novel, Indium.
She had chosen to publish it under a pseudonym, “George Sand,” and all
of Paris assumed this impressive new writer was male. Dudevant had
sometimes worn men’s clothes before creating “George Sand” (she had always found men‘s shirts and riding breeches more comfortable); now, as
a public figure, she exaggerated the image. She added long men’s coats,
gray hats, heavy boots, and dandyish cravats to her wardrobe. She smoked
cigars and in conversation expressed herself like a man, unafraid to domiv
nate the conversation or to use a. saucy word,
This strange “male/female” writer fascinated the public. And unlike
other women writers, Sand found herself accepted into the clique of male
artists. She drank and smoked with them, even carried on affairs with the
most famous artists of Europe—Musset, Liszt, Chopin. It was she who did
the wooing, and also the abandoning-—she moved on at her discretion.
Those who knew Sand well understood that her male persona protected her from the public’s prying eyes. Out in the world, she enjoyed
playing the part to the extreme; in private she remained herself. She also
realized that the character of “George Sand” could grow stale or predictable, and to avoid this she would every now and then dramatically alter
the character she had created; instead of conducting affairs with famous
men, she would begin meddling in politics, leading demonstrations, inspiring student rebellions. No one would dictate to her the limits of the character she had created. Long after she died, and after most people had stopped
reading her novels, the larger-than—life theatricality of that character has
continued to fascinate and inspire.
Interpretation
Throughout Sand’s public life, acquaintances and other artists who spent
time in her company had the feeling they were in the presence of a man.
But in herjournals and to her closest friends, such as Gustave Flaubert, she
confessed that she had no desire to be a man, but was playing a part for
public consumption. What she really wanted was the power to determine
her own character. She refused the limits her society would have set on her.
She did not attain her power, however, by being herself; instead she created a
persona that she could constantly adapt to her own desires, a
persona that attracted attention and gave her presence.
Understand this: The world wants to assign you a role in life. And
once you accept that role you are doomed. Your power is limited to the
tiny amount allotted to the role you have selected or have been forced to
assume. An actor, on the other hand, plays many roles. Enjoy that protean
power, and if it is beyond you, at least forge a new identity, one of your
own making, one that has had no boundaries assigned to it by an envious
and resentful world. This act of defiance is Promethean: It makes you re»
sponsible for your own creation.
Your new identity will protect you from the world precisely because it
is not “you”; it is a costume you put on and take off. You need not take it
personally. And your new identity sets you apart, gives you theatrical presence. Those in the back rows can see you and hear you. Those in the front
rows marvel at your audacity.
Do not people talk in society of a man being a great actor? They do not mean by
that that he/"eels, but that he excels in simulating, though hefeels nothing.
I)»m,i.r I)iderot, 1713-1 784
KEYS TO POWER
The character you seem to have been born with is not necessarily who you
are; beyond the characteristics you have inherited, your parents, your
friends, and your peers have helped to shape your personality. The
Promethean task of the powerful is to take control of the process, to stop allowing others that ability to limit and mold them. Remake yourself into a
character of power. Working on yourself like clay should be one of your
greatest and most pleasurable life tasks. It makes you in essence an a11ist—
an artist creating yourself.
In fact, the idea of self—creation comes from the world of art. For thouLAW 25 195
196 LAW 25
sands of years, only kings and the highest courtiers had the freedom to
shape their public image and determine their own identity. Similarly, only
kings and the wealthiest lords could contemplate their own image in art,
and consciously alter it. The rest of mankind played the limited role that
society demanded of them, and had little selficonsciousness.
A shift in this condition can be detected in Velézquez’s painting La:
Marinas, made in 1656. The artist appears at the left of the canvas, standing
before a painting that he is in the process of creating. but that has its back
to us——-we cannot see it. Beside him stands a princess, her attendanw, and
one of the court dwarves, all watching him work. The people posing for the
painting are not directly visible, but we can see them in tiny reflections in a
mirror on the back wal]—-—the king and queen ofSpain, who must be sitting
somewhere in the foreground, outside the picture.
The painting represents a dramatic change in the dynamics of power
and the ability to determine one’s own position in society. For Velazquez,
the artist, is far more prominently positioned than the king and queen. In a
sense he is more powerful than they are, since he is clearly the one control»
ling the irnage--their image. Velazquez no longer saw himself as the slavish, dependent artist. He had remade himself into a man of power. And
indeed the first people other than aristocrats to play openly with their
image in Western society were artists and writers, and later on dandies and
bohemians. Today the concept of selflcreation has slowly filtered down to
the rest of society, and has become an ideal to aspire to. Like Velazquez,
you must demand for yourself the power to determine your position in the
painting, and to create your own image.
The first step in the process of self—creation is self-consciousnessbeing aware of yourself as an actor and taking control of your appearance
and emotions. As Diderot said, the bad actor is the one who is always sincere. People who wear their hearts on their sleeves out in society are tiresome and embarrassing. Their sincerity notwithstanding, it is hard to take
them seriously. Those who cry in public may temporarily elicit sympathy,
but sympathy soon turns to scorn and irritation at their selfobsessiveness-«~they are crying to get attention, we feel, and a malicious
part of us wants to deny them the satisfaction.
Good actors control themselves better. They can play sincere and
heartfelt, can affect a tear and a
compassionate look at will, but they don’t
have to feel it. They externalize emotion in a form that others can understand. Method acting is fatal in the real world. No ruler or leader could
possibly play the part if all of the emotions he showed had to be real. So
learn self-control. Adopt the plasticity of the actor, who can mold his or her
face to the emotion required.
The second step in the process of selflcreation is a Variation on the
George Sand strategy: the creation of a memorable character, one that
compels attention, that stands out above the other players on the stage.
This was the game Abraham Lincoln played. The homespun, common
country man, he knew, was a kind of president that America had never had
but would delight in electing. Although many of these qualifies came naturally to him, he played them up--the hat and clothes, the beard. (No president before him had worn a beard.) Lincoln was also the first president to
use photographs to spread his image, helping to create the icon of the
“homespun president.”
Good drama, however, needs more than an interesting appearance, or
a single stand-out moment. Drama takes place over time—~it is an unfolding event Rhythm and timing are critical. One of the most important ele
ments in the rhythm of drama is suspense. Houdini for instance, could
sometimes complete his escape acts in seconds——but he drew them out to
minutes, to make the audience sweat.
The key to keeping the audience on the edge of their seats is letting
events unfold slowly, then speeding them up at the right moment, accordingto a pattern and tempo that you control. Great rulers from Napoleon to
Mao Tseturig have used theatrical timing to surprise and divert their pub
lic. Franklin Delano Roosevelt understood the importance of staging polio»
cal events in R particular order and rhythm.
At the time of his 1932 presidential election, the United States was in
the midst of a dire economic crisis. Banks were failing at an alarming rate.
Shortly after winning the election, Roosevelt went into at kind of retreat.
He said nothing about his plans or his cabinet appointments, He even re~
fused to meet the sitting president, Herbert Hoover, to discuss the transition. By the time of Roosevelt’s inauguration the country was in a state of
high anxiety.
In his inaugural address, Roosevelt shifted gears. He made a powerful
speech, making it clear that he intended to lead the country in a
completely
new direction, sweeping away the timid gestures of his predecessors. From
then on the pace of his speeches and public decisions——cabinet appointments, bold legislatiori—~unfolded at an incredibly rapid rate. The period
after the inauguration became known as the “Hundred Days,” and its success in altering the country’s mood partly stemmed from Roosevelfs clever
pacing and use of dramatic contrast. He held his audience in suspense,
then hit them with a series of bold gestures that seemed all the more momentous because they came from nowhere. You must learn to orchestrate
events in a similar manner, never revealing all your cards at once, but unfolding them in a way that heightens their dramatic effect.
Besides covering a multitude of sins, good drama can also confuse and
deceive your enemy. During World War II, the German playwright Bertolt
Brecht worked in Hollywood as a screenwriter. After the war he was called
before the House Committee on Un-American Activities for his supposed
Communist sympathies. Other writers who had been called to testify
planned to humiliate the committee members with an angry emotional
stand. Brecht was wiser: He would play the committee like a violin, charmv
ing them while fooling them as well. He carefully rehearsed his responses,
and brought along some props, notably a cigar on which he puffed away,
knowing the head of the committee hked cigars. And indeed he proceeded
LAW 25 197
to beguile the committee with well—crafted responses that were ambiguous,
funny, and double—edged. Instead of an angry, heartfelt tirade, he ran circles around them with a staged production, and they let him off scot-free.
Other dramatic effects for your repertoire include the beau geste, an
action at a climactic moment that symbolizes your triumph or your boldness. Caesar’s dramatic crossing of the Rubicon was a beau geste——a move
that dazzled the soldiers and gave him heroic proportions. You must also
appreciate the importance of stage entrances and exits. When Cleopatra
first met Caesar in Egypt, she arrived rolled up in a
carpet, which she
arranged to have unfurled at his feet. George Washington twice left power
with flourish and fanfare (first as a general, then as a president who refused
to sit for a third term), showing he knew how to make the moment count,
dramatically and symbolically. Your own entrances and exits should be
crafied and planned as carefully.
Remember that overacting can be counte1productive—it is another
way of spending too much effort trying to attract attention. The actor
Richard Burton discovered early in his career that by standing totally still
onstage, he drew attention to himself and away from the other actors. It is
less what you do that matters, clearly, than how you do it—your gracefulness and imposing stillness on the social stage count for more than overdo»
ing your part and moving around too much.
Finally: Learn to play many roles, to be whatever the moment re»
quires. Adapt your mask to the situation-be protean in the faces you wear.
Bismarck played this game to perfection: To a liberal he was a
liberal, to a
hawk he was a hawk. He could not be grasped, and what cannot be
grasped cannot be consumed.
I m a
g
e :
The Greek Sea—God Proteus.
His power came from his ability to
change shape at will, to be whatever the
moment required. When Menelaus, brother
of Agarnemnon, tried to seize him, Proteus
transformed himself into a lion, then a
serpent, a
panther, a boar, running water, and finally a
leafy tree.
Authority: Know how to be all things to all men. A discreet Proteus—a
scholar among scholars, a saint among saints. That is the art ofwinning over
everyone, for like attracts like. Take note of temperaments and adapt your
self to that of each person you meet—follow the lead of the serious and
jovial in turn, changing your mood discreetly. (Baltasar Gracian, 1601-1658)
198 LAW 25
REVERSAL
There can really be no reversal to this critical law: Bad theater is bad theater. Even appearing natural requires a.rt—in other words, acting. Bad acting only creates embarrassment. Of course you should not be too
dramatic—avoid the histfionic gesture. But that is simply bad theater anyway, since it violates centuries-old dramatic laws against overacting. In
essence there is no reversal to this law.
LAW 25 199
LAW
26
KEEP YOUR HANDS CLEAN
JUDGMENT
You must seem a paragon of civility and efficienr.y.'
Your hands am: never soiled by mistakes and nasty
deeds. Maintain suck a spotless appearance by using
others as scapegoats and catiwpams to disguise your
involvemmt.
200
PART I-. CONCEAL YOUR MIS'I‘AKES-~
HAVE A SCAPEGOAT AROUND TO TAKE THE BLAME
Our good name and reputation depend more on what we conceal than on
what we reveal. Everyone makes mistakes, but those who are truly clever
manage to hide them, and to make sure someone else is blamed. A convenient scapegoat should always be kept amzmdfor such moments.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW 1
Near the end of the second century A.D., as China’s mighty Han Empire
slowly collapsed, the great general and imperial minister Ts’ao Ts’ao
emerged as the most powerful man in the country. Seeking to extend his
power base and to rid himself of the last of his rivals, 'Is’ao Ts’ao began a
campaign to take conlrol of the strategically vital Central Plain. During the
siege of a
key city, be slightly miscalculoted the timing for supplies of grain
to arrive from the capital. As he waited for the shipment to come in, the
army ran low on food, and Ts’ao Ts’ao was forced to order the chief of
commissariat to reduce its rations.
Ts‘ao Ts’ao kept a
tight rein on the army, and ran a network ofinformers. His spies soon reported that the men were complaining, grumbling
that he was living well while they themselves had barely enough to eat.
Perhaps Ts’ao Ts’ao was keeping the food for himself, they murmured. If
the grumbling spread, Ts’ao Ts’ao could have a mutiny on his hands. He
summoned the chief of commissariat to his tent
“I want to ask you to lend me something, and you must not refuse,”
Ts’ao Ts’ao told the chief. “What is it?” the chiefreplied. “I want the loam of
your head to show to the troops,” said Ts’ao Ts’a.o. “But I’ve dope nothing
wrong!” cried the chief. “I know,” said Ts’ao Ts’ao with a sigh, “but if I do
not put you to death, there will be a mutiny. Do not grieve-—a.fter you’re
gone, I’ll look after your family.” Put this way, the request left the chief no
choice, so he resigned himself to his fate and was beheaded that very day.
Seeing his head on public display, the soldiers stopped grumbling. Some
saw through Ts’ao Ts’ao‘s gesture, but kept quiet, stunned and intimidated
by his violence. And most accepted his version of who was to blame, preferring to believe in his wisdom and fairness than in his incompetence and
cruelty.
Interpretation
Ts’ao Ts’ao came to power in an extremely tumultuous time. In the struggle
for supremacy in the crumbling Han Empire, enemies had emerged from
all sides. The battle for the Central Plain had proven more difficult than he
imagined, and money and provisions were a constant concern. No wonder
that under such stress, he had forgotten to order supplies in time.
Once it became clear that the delay wa.s a critical mistake, and that the
army was seething with mutiny, Ts’ao 'Is’ao had two options: apology and
excuses, or a
scapegoat. Understanding the workings of power and the im—
(IIIEIM .lU~:'E'lfili
A great calarnity hefcll
the (own of Chelm one
day. The mwn zrablrler
murrlered one ufltix
customers. So he was
brought before the
judge. who xemenzretl
him 10 die by hanging.
When the verdict was
read a Iownsmcm arose
and cried am, “Ifyour
Humor ple:2.\ex~)-oz:
have semertcerl to death
the town cobbler! He is
the only one we‘ve got.
I
Iyou hang him who
will mend our shoes?"
“Who? Who? "
cried all
the people of Chelm
with one voice.
The judge nodtlecl in
agreement and reconsidered his verdict.
“Good people of
Chelm, "
he said, “
what
you .s’a_,v is true. Since
we have only one ml)-
hler it would be a great
wrong against me wm—
munlry to let /ilm die.
As zlwre are two
mofers in the town In
one ofthem be lzcmged
inxlearl. "
A |‘RliASl;RY or JEWISH
rm.Ki,0Ri‘-..
NA'1‘HA.~ AL:s1'isi~.L. 2:13..
1948
LAW 26 201
202 LAW 20
portance of appearances as he did, Ts’ao Ts’ao did not hesitate for a moment: He shopped around for the most convenient head and had it served
up immediately.
Occasional mistakes are inevitable——the world is just too nnpre
diciable. People of power, however. are undone not by the mistakes they
make, but by the way they deal with them. Like surgeons, they must cut
away the tumor with speed and finality. Excuses and apologies are much
too blunt tools for this delicate operation; the powerful avoid them. By
apologizing you open up all sorts of doubts about your competence, your
intentions, any other mistakes you may not have confessed. Excuses satisfy
no one and apologies make everyone uncomfortable. The mistake does
not vanish with an apology; it deepens and testers. Better to cut it off instantly, distract attention from yourself, and focus attention on a conve
nient scapegoat before people have time to ponder your responsibility or
your possible incompetence.
I would rather betray the whole world than let the world betray me.
(.‘u7mul '13"ua 'I‘5’ao, 1:. A12. 155-220
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW 11
For several years Cesare Borgia campaigned to gain control of large parts
of Italy in the name of his father, Pope Alexander. In the year I500 he
managed to take Romagna, in northern Italy. The region had for years
been ruled by a series of greedy masters who had plundered its wealth for
themselves. Without police or any disciplining force, it had descended into
lawlessness, whole areas being ruled by robbers and feuding families.
To establish order, Cesare appointed a lieutenant general of the region-—
Remixro de Oreo, “a cruel and vigorous man,” according to Niccolo
Machiavelli. Cesare gave the Orco absolute powers.
With energy and violence, de Orco established a severe, brutal justice
in Rornagna, and soon rid it of almost all of its lawless elements. But in his
zeal he sometimes went too far, and after a couple of years the local population resented and even hated him. In December of 1502, Cesare took dc»
cisive action. He first let it be known that he had not approved of de Orco’s
cruel and violent deeds, which stemmed from the lieutenanfs brutal nature. Then, on December 22, he imprisoned cle Drco in the town of Cesena, and the day after Christmas the townspeople awoke to find a
strange
spectacle in the middle of the piazza: do Orco’s headless body, dressed in a
lavish suit with a purple cape, the head impaled beside it on a pike, the
bloody knife and executioner’s block laid out beside the head. As Machiavelli concluded his comments on the affair, “The ferocity of this scene left
the people at once stunned and satisfied.”
Interpretation
Cesare Borgia was a master player in the game of power. Always planning
several moves ahead, he set his opponents the cleverest traps. For this
Machiavelli honored him above all others in The Prince.
Cesare foresaw the future with amazing clarity in Romagna‘. Only brutal justice would bring order to the region. The process would take several
years, and at first the people would welcome it. But it would soon make
many enemies, and the citizens would come to resent the imposition of
such unforgiving justice, especially by outsiders. Cesare himself, then,
could not be seen as the agent of this justice-—the people’s hatred would
cause too many problems in the future. And so he chose the one man who
could do the dirty work, knowing in advance that once the task was done
he would have to display de Orco’s head on a pike. The scapegoat in this
case had been planned from the beginning.
With Ts’ao Ts’ao, the scapegoat was an entirely innocent man; in the
Romagna, he was the offensive weapon in Cesare’s arsenal that let him get
the dirty work done without bloodying his own hands. With this second
kind of scapegoat it is wise to separate yourself from the hatchet man at
some point, either leaving him dangling in the wind or, like Cesare, even
making yourself the one to bring him to justice. Not only are you free ofinvolvement in the problem, you can appear as the one who cleaned it up.
The Athenians regularly maintained a number ofdegraded and useless
being: at the public expense; and when any calamity, such asplague,
drought, orfamine, befell the city . . . [these smpegoats] were led about . . A
and then sacrificed, appznvntly by being stoned outside: the city.
The Golden Bough. Sirjames Gemge Frazer, 1854-19-71
KEYS TO POWER
The use of scapegoats is as old as civilization itself, and examples of it can
be found in cultures around the world. The main idea behind these sacrifices is the shifting of guilt and sin to an outside fig'ure—object, animal, or
man—which is then banished or destroyed. The Hebrews used to take a
live goat (hence the term “scapegoat”) upon whose head the priest would
lay both hands while confessing the sins of the Children of Israel. Having
thus had those sins transferred to it, the beast would be led away and abandoned in the wilderness. With the Athenians and the Aztecs, the scapegoat
was human, often a
person fed and raised for the purpose. Since famine
and plague were thought to be visited on humans by the gods, in punish‘
ment for wrongdoing, the people suffered not only from the famine and
plague themselves but from blame and guilt. They freed themselves ofguilt
by transferring it to an innocent person, whose death was intended to satisfy the divine powers and banish the evil from their midst.
It is an extremely human response to not look inward after a mistake
or crime, but rather to look outward and to affix blame and guilt on a convenient object. When the plague was ravaging Thebes, Oedipus looked
everywhere for its cause, everywhere except inside himself and his own sin
of incest, which had so offended the gods and occasioned the plague. This
profound need to exteriorize one’s guilt, to project it on another person or
object, has an immense power, which the clever know how to harness. SarLAW 26 203
204 LAW 20‘
rifice is a ritual, perhaps the most ancient ritual of all; ritual too is a wellspring of power. In the killing of de Orco, note Cesa.re’s symbolic and ritualistic display of his body. By framing it in this dramatic way he focused
guilt outward The citizens of Romagna responded instantly. Because it
comes so naturally to us to look outward rather than inward, we readily ac~
cept the scapegoat’s guilt.
The bloody sacrifice of the scapegoat seems a barbaric relic of the
past, but the practice lives on to this day, if indirectly and symbolically;
since power depends on appearances, and those in power must seem never
to make mistakes, the use of scapegoats is as popular as ever. What modern
leader will take responsibility for his blunders? He searches out others
to blame, a scapegoat to sacrifice. When Mao Tse-tung’s Cultural Rev—
olution failed miserably, he made no apologies or excuses to the Chinese
people; instead, like Ts’ao Ts’ao before him, he offered up scapegoats, in»
cluding his own personal secretary and higlrranking member of the Party,
Ch ’en Po-ta.
Franklin D. Roosevelt had a
reputation for honesty and fairness.
Throughout his career, however, he faced many situations in which being
the nice guy would have spelled political d.isaster—yet he could not be
seen as the agent of any foul play. For twenty years, then, his secretary,
Louis Howe, played the role de Orco had. He handled the backroom deals,
the manipulation ofthe press, the underhandecl campaign maneuvers. And
whenever a mistake was committed, or a dirty trick contradicting Roosevelt’s carefully crafted image became public, Howe served as the scapegoat, and never complained.
Besides conveniently shifting blame, a
scapegoat can serve as a warning to others. In 1631 a plot was hatched to oust France’s Cardinal Richelieu from power, a plot that became known as “The Day of the Dupes.” It
almost succeeded, since it involved the upper echelons of government, in«
cluding the queen mother. But through luck and his own connivances,
Richelieu survived.
One of the key conspirators was a man named Marillac, the keeper of
the seals. Richelieu could not imprison him without implicating the queen
mother, an extremely dangerous tactic, so he targeted Marillac’s brother, a
marshal in the army. This man had no involvement in the plot. Richelieu,
however, afraid that other conspiracies might be in the air, especially in the
army, decided to set an example. He tried the brother on trurnped«up
charges and had him executed. In this way he indirectly punished the real
perpetrator, who had thought himself protected, and warned any future
conspirators that he would not shrink from sacrificing the innocent to protect his own power.
'
In fact it is often wise to choose the most innocent victim possible as a
sacrificial goat. Such people will not be powerful enough to fight you, and
their naive protests may be seen as protesting too much—may be seen, in
other words, as a
sign of their guilt. Be careful, however, not to create a
martyr. It is important that ytm remain the victim, the poor leader betrayed
by the incompetence of those around you. If the scapegoat appears too
weak and his punishment too cruel, you may end up the victim of your
own device. Sometimes you should find a more powerful scapegoatm-one
who will elicit less sympathy in the long run.
In this vein, history has time and again shown the value of using a
close associate as a scapegoat. This is known as the “fall of the favorite.”
Most kings had a personal favorite at court, a man whom they singled out,
sometimes for no apparent reason, and lavished with favors and attention.
But this court favorite could serve as at convenient scapegoat in case of a
threat to the king’s reputation. The public would readily believe in the
scapegoat’s guilt-—why would the king sacrifice his favorite unless he were
guilty? And the other couxtiers, resendul of the favorite anyway, would rejoice at his downfall. The king, meanwhile, would rid himself of a man who
by that time had probably learned too much about him, perhaps becoming
arrogant and even disdainful of him. Choosing a close associate as a
scapegoat has the same value as the “fall of the favorite.” You may lose a friend
or aide, but in the long—term scheme of things, it is more important to hide
your mistakes than to hold on to someone who one day will probably turn
against you. Besides, you can always find a. new favorite to take his place.
Image: The Innocent Goat. On
the Day of Atonement, the high
priest brings the goat into the
temple, places his hands on its
head, and confesses the pea»
ple’s sins, transferring guilt to
the guiltless beast, which is
then led to the wilderness and
abandoned, the people’s sins
and blame vanishing with him.
Authority: Folly consists not in committing Folly, but in being
incapable of concealing it. All men make mistakes, but the wise
conceal the blunders they have made, while fools make them pub~
lic. Reputation depends more on what is hidden than on what is
seen. If you can’t be good, be careful. (Baltasar Grecian, 16014658)
LAW 26 2/15
ll ll‘. \i1)\K|-ZV «‘l\|5
'lHI- (',,\'l
A monkey and cat, in
ruguery and fun
Sworn brothel-,9 twain.
lmzh owned a (‘L’)iI7II1(lI’I
masten
Wlmtever mischief in
the lttmse was donut
By Pug and Tom
was crmtriverl carh
dimstur. . 4 .
One winter's day was
seen this hopeful pair
Close in me kitchen
fire, as usual, posted.
Amongst the rr-d-hot
rrmrlv the cook with
rare
Hm! plat, ‘(I sornr‘ nice
plump chesmuia‘ to be
rrI(1.s‘l:’€(¥’.
From whence in .vmvke
a pmzgerir odor rI).§'€,
Whose oziy /'ragraru:o
struck the rmmkuy ‘.9
t1()A‘¢¢.
“'l‘om!"suy.v sly l’u},*.
"pray amid not you
and!
Share this dessert the
muk is jrluzsed to
cater?
Had I .\'H('}: claws as
yours. l'r1' quickly‘ try:
I4‘.',1l} me a !IamI——‘1wi1I
be a coup—rie—rnaitre.
“
So said. he seized his
colleagues ready paw,
Puller! our the fruit,
:2()6 LAW 26
PART II: MAKE USE OF THE CAT’S»l’AVV
In thefable, the Monkey grabs the paw ofhisfriend, the Cat, and uses it to
fish chestnuts out ofthefire, thus getting the nuts he craves, without hurting himself
Ifthere is something unpleasant or unpopular that needs to be done,
it is for too risky foryou to do the work yourself You need an catty-{Jaw-—
someone who does the dirty, dangerous work for you. The cat ’5«paw grabs
what you need, hurts whom you need hurt, and keeps peoplefrom noticing
that you are the one responsible. Let someone else be the executioner or the
bearer ofhad news, while you bring zmlyjoy and glad tidings.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAVV I
In 59 B.C., the future queen Cleopatra of Egypt, then ten years old, wit~
nessed the overthrow and banishment of her father, Ptolemy XII, at the
hand of his elder daughters-«her own sisters. One of the daughters,
Berenice, emerged as the leader of the rebellion, and to ensure that she
would now rule Egypt alone, she imprisoned her other sisters and murdered her own husband. This may have been necessary as a practical step
to secure her rule. But that a member of the royal family, a
queen no less,
would so overtly exact such violence on her own family horrified her subjects and stirred up powerful opposition. Four years later this opposition
was able to return Ptolemy to power, and he promptly had Berenice and
the other elder sisters beheaded.
In 51 B.C. Ptolemy died, leaving four remaining children as heirs. As
was the tradition in Egypt, the eldest son, Ptolemy XIII (only ten at the
time), married the elder sister, Cleopatra (now eighteen), and the couple
took the throne together as king and queen. None of the four children felt
satisfied with this; everyone, including Cleopatra, wanted more power. A
struggle emerged between Cleopatra and Ptolemy, earl: trying to push the
other to the side.
In 48 15.0., with the help of a government faction that feared Cleopatra’s ambitions, Ptolemy was able to force his sister to flee the country,
leaving himself as sole ruler. In exile, Cleopatra schemed. She wanted to
rule alone and to restore Egypt to its past glory, a goal she felt none of her
other siblings could achieve; yet as long as they were alive, she could not
realize her dream. And the example ofBerenice had made it clear that no
one would serve a queen who was seen murdering her own kind. Even
Ptolemy XIII had not dared murder Cleopatra, although he knew she
would plot against him from abroad.
Within a
year after Cleopatra’s banishment, the Roman dictator Julius
Caesar arrived in Egypt, determined to make the country a Roman colony.
Cleopatra saw her chance: Reentering Egypt in disguise, she traveled hundreds of miles to reach Caesar in Alexandria. Legend has it that she had
herself smuggled into his presence rolled up inside a carpet, which was
gracefully unfurled at his feet, revealing the young queen. Cleopatra imme
diately went to work on the Roman. She appealed to his love of spectacle
and his interest in Egyptian history, and poured on her feminine charms.
Caesar soon succumbed and restored Cleopatra to the throne.
Cleopatra’s siblings seethed—she had outrnaneuvered them. Ptolemy
XIII would not wait to see what happened next: From his palace in
Alexandria, he summoned a great army to march on the city and attack
Caesar. In response, Caesar immediately put Ptolemy and the rest of the
family under house arrest. But Cleopatra’s younger sister Arsinoe escaped
from the palace and placed herself at the head of the approaching Egyptian
troops, proclaiming herself queen of Egypt. Now Cleopatra finally saw her
chance: She convinced Caesar to release Ptolemy from house arrest, under
the agreement that he would broker a. truce. Of course she knew he would
do the opposite—that he would fight Arsinoe for control of the Egyptian
army. But this was to Cleopatra’s benefit, for it would divide the royal family. Better still, it would give Caesar the chance to defeat and kill her siblings in battle.
Reinforced by troops from Rome, Caesar swiftly defeated the rebels.
In the Egyptians’ retreat, Ptolemy drowned in the Nile. Caesar captured
Arsinoe and had her sent to Rome as a prisoner. He also executed the nu»
merous enemies who had conspired against Cleopatra, and imprisoned
others who had opposed her. To reinforce her position as uncontested
queen, Cleopatra now married the only sibling left, Ptolemy XIV—only
eleven at the time, and the weakest of the lot. Four years later Ptolemy
mysteriously died, ofpoison.
In 41 B.C., Cleopatra employed on a second Roman leader, Marc
Antony, the same tactics she had used so well on Julius Caesar. After seducing him, she hinted to him that her sister Arsinoe, still a prisoner in
Rome, had conspired to destroy him. Marc Antony believed her and
promptly had Arsinoe executed, thereby getting rid of the last of the sib
lings who had posed such a threat to Cleopatra.
Interpretation
Legend has it that Cleopatra succeeded through her seductive charms, but
in reality her power came from an ability to get people to do her bidding
without realizing they were being manipulated. Caesar and Antony not
only rid her of her most dangerous siblings—Ptolemy XIII and Arsinoe—
they decimated all of her enemies, in both the government and the military. The two men became her cat’s—paws. They entered the fire for her,
did the ugly butnecessary work, while shielding her from appearing as the
destroyer of herlsiblings and fellow Egyptians. And in the end, both men
acquiesced to herldesire to rule Egypt not as a Roman colony but as an independent allied kingdom. And they did all this for her without realizing
how she had manipulated them. This was persuasion of the subtlest and
most powerful kind.
and rra/mmer/l it in his
jaw.
Now (.‘(lIVll’ the slzining
Mislrms of (h e
farm/.
Ami uffin hrlste the
mo marauclerv
scampercd.
Tom for his share of
the plunder had the
pain.
VWtil.\‘l Pug his /mlan:
with the rlairztim
pampered.
h\BLhS.
Jam: 1)}: LA FUN IAIN!-_‘,
16214695
T|lIi(lR()\3;-ill-1.\'. TIIF
(.()I3Rr\. «VD Till",
l,«\(.|\'M.
Once u[Ir)r1 11 time there
war it Crow and /tis wife
who had built (1 next in
11 lzanymi tree./1 big
wzake crawled into {he
hollow Irurtk and are
up my chicks as they
were hmclwd. The crow
did not want to move.
since he loved the tree
dearly, So he went to
his friend the jackalfor
advire. A plan nfaclizm
was zlewlved. The crow
and his wifeflew about
in implemenmlimz.
As the wife approached
ti pond, she saw the
women of the king '5
court bathing, Willi
pearls, rzecklaccs, gems,
garments. and :1 golden
rhum laying on /he
5/mrrr. T/11-' crow-hen
seized the gulrlerr chain
in her beak and flew
toward the btmytm tree
wirh Ihe eunuchs in
pursuit. When she
reached the tree. she
dropped the chain mm
(he hole. As the kings
'
LAW 26 207
men climbed (he tree
for the r-ham, they saw
the swelling hood of
the cobra. So they
killed (he snake with
«Imr ci'uh€, f(‘Ifi(7\/(J6!
the golden cimin, and
went back to the pond.
Am! the (‘row and
his wife iéved /mppiiy
ever after.
A 'I‘A1,e mom THE
PAN('HA‘|‘AN ma,
mx:sz'rnr ‘min.
RF mzm
Tm: (‘RAFT our rowan,
R.G HS .1979
HUW T17
|iRU.\I)( .\.\"l' Vl'.\X 5
When Omar. son of
al-Khallab, wax‘
crmverml I0 Islam, he
wanted the news of hit
conversion to reach
everyone quickly. Hrwent to see Jamil. ran
of Max 'mar ul-Jumalu.
The latter was renowneci for the speed
with which he passed
on ,m'ret.s. [file was
mlrl anyllziizg in confidmce, he let everymze
know about it immediately. Omar mil! to
him: “I haw i!(N‘l>II'lU a
Musiirrz. Do not say
arivrhirzg. Keep it dark.
[)0 not mmnbn it in
from ofanyone,
"
Jamil wen: out into the
.'x‘N'<'ex and began simuling; at the top of/iis
mire.‘ "Do you believe
that Omar, son ofalKiumair. has not
become a Muslim?
Well, do not believe
that.’ I am telling you
that he has!"
206i LAW 26
A queen must never dirty her hands with ugly tasks, nor can a king ap
pear in public with blood on his face. Yet power cannot survive without the
constant squashing of enemies-«there will always be dirty little tasks that
have to be done to keep you on the throne. Like Cleopatra, you need a
Ca.t’s-paw.
This will usually be a
person from outside your immediate circle, who
will therefore be unlikely to realize how he or she is being used. You will
find these dupes everywhere——people who enjoy doing you favors, espe
cially if you throw them a minimal bone or two in exchange. But as they
accomplish tasks that may seem to them innocent enough, or at least completely justified, they are actually clearing the field for you, spreading the
information you feed them, undermining people they do not realize are
your rivals, inadvertently furthering your cause, dirtying their hands while
yours remain spotless.
DBSERVANCE OF THE LAW 11
In the late 1920s, civil war broke out in China as the Nationalist and Com
munist parties battled for control of the country. In 1927 Chiang Kai—shek,
the Nationalist leader, vowed to kill every last Communist, and over the
next few years he nearly accomplished his task, pushing his enemies hard
until, in 1934-1935, he forced them into the Long March, a six-thousand
mile retreat from the southeast to the remote northwest, through harsh terrain, in which most of their ranks were decimated. In late 1936 Chiang
planned one last offensive to wipe them out, but he was caught in a mutiny:
His own soldiers captured him and turned him over to the Communists.
Now he could only expect the worst.
Meanwhile, however, the Japanese began an invasion of China, and
much to Chiang’s surprise, instead of killing him the Communist leader,
Mao Tse~tung, proposed a deal: The Communists would let him go, and
would recognize him as commander of their forces as well as his, if he
would agree to fight alongside them against their common enemy. Chiang
had expected torture and execution; now he could not believe his luck.
How soit these Reds had become. Without having to fight a
rearguard action against the Communists, he knew he could beat the Japanese, and
then a few years down the line he would turn around and destroy the Reds
with ease, He had nothing to lose and everything to gain by agreeing to
their terms.
The Communists proceeded to fight the Japanese in their usual fash~
ion, with hit»and-run guerrilla tactics, while the Nationalists fought a more
conventional war. Together, alter several years, they succeeded in evicting
the Japanese. Now, however, Chiang finally understood what Mao had really planned. His own army had met the bnmt of the Japanese artillery,
was greatly weakened, and would take a few years to recover. The Com~
munists, meanwhile, had not only avoided any direct hits from the japa~
nese, they had used the time to recoup their strength, and to spread out
and gain pockets ofinfluence all over China. As soon as the war against the
Japanese ended, the civil war started aga.in—but this time the Communists
enveloped the weakened Nationalists and slowly beat them into submission. The Japanese had served as Mao’s cat’s-paw, inadvertently ploughing
the fields for the Communists and making possible their victory over Chiang Kai~shel<.
Interpretation
Most leaders who had taken as powerful an enemy as Chiang Kai-shek
prisoner would have made sure to kill him. But in doing so they would
have lost the chance Mao exploited. Without the experienced Chiang as
leader of the Nationalists, the fight to drive the Japanese out might have
lasted much longer, with devastating results. Mao was far too clever to let
anger spoil the chance to kill two birds with one stone. In essence, Mao
used two cat’s-paws to help him attain total victory. First, he cleverly baited
Chiang into taking charge of the war against the Japanese. Mao knew the
Nationalists led by Chiang would do most of the hard fighting and would
succeed in pushing the Japanese out of China, if they did not have to concern themselves with fighting the Communists at the same time. The Nationalists, then, were the first cat’s—paw, used to evict the Japanese. But
Mao also knew that in the process of leading the war against the invaders,
the Japanese artillery and air support would decimate the conventional
forces of the Nationalists, doing damage it could take the Communists
decades to inflict. Why waste time and lives if the Japanese could do the
job quickly? It was this wise policy of using one cat’s—paw after another that
allowed the Communists to prevail.
There are two uses of the cat’s—paw: to save appearances, as Cleopatra
did, and to save energy and effort. The latter case in particular demands
that you plan several moves in advance, realizing that a
temporary move
backward (letting Chiang go, say) can lead to a giant leap forward. If you
are temporarily weakened and need time to recover, it will often serve you
well to use those around you both as a screen to hide your intentions and
as a cat’s~paw to do your work for you. Look for a powerful third party who
shares an enemy with you (if for different reasons), then take advantage of
their superior power to deal blows which would have cost you much more
energy, since you are weaker. You can even gently guide them into hostilities. Always search out the overly aggressive as potential cat’s-paws—they
are often more than willing to get into a
fight, and you can choose just the
right fight for your purposes.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW III
Kuriyama Daizen was an adept of Cha-no—yu (Hot Water for Tea, the
Japanese tea ceremony) and a student of the teachings of the great tea master Sen no Rikyu. Around 1620 Daizen learned that a friend of his,
Hoshino Soemon, had borrowed a
large sum of money (300 ryo) to help a
The news of Omafs
c0nveP.s'i(m to Islam
was spread everywliere.
And that was juxl what
he intended.
1..
‘
Ill'l‘l.l RUSF3
OOK OF ARABIF
WISDOM AN!) (}llll.l-Z.
1HlR'I‘El:N'1n L'l:Nl'LRY
A l'(>0|. A\lJ \ V Ihli MM
A wise man,
walking alone,
Wm’ being bothered by
a fool throwmg mom,-s
at his head.
Turning /0 face him,
he said:
“My dear chap, wrll
thrown!
Please llCL‘€])l rlxese
few fnmcs.
Yuzfve worked hard
enough 10 get nmrc
than mere thanks.
Every effort deserves‘
its reward.
But see that man over
there? He can afford
More than Iran.
PI‘(’.\‘L’Il1 him with some
afyour stones: lhc>y’ll
earn a good wage."
Lurrad by the hail,
the stupid mun
Rom afflo repeal
the oulmgz-,
On the other worthy
citizen.
'1 us [me he want '1
paid in money
for his xtnnrs.
Up ruslzczl
serving—mcn.
Amt seized him and
thrmlmd hm: and
broke all his homes.
In the courts 0fkings
(here are pests like this‘,
devoid of reuse:
7'lzey ’II makr: their
LAW 26 209
mnszrrr laugh at your
expen.w.
To .s‘u'm(:r: thzrir ('fl(‘klI‘,,
should you hand out
rough
Pzinixhmmt? Maybe
you ‘re nor .vtmn,g
mouglt.
Bauer persuade them
to attack
Samebolly efxv, who
am more than pay
iherrt back.
.\ELE('l'EU FABLES.
Jr AV or; LA Fnx'miNIv'.
1621-1695
I Hi‘. |\|)l,\\ Bllll)
A merrlmm kip! a bird
in a cage. lie was going
to India, me [mid from
wliich she hirrl zwmt’.
and asked it wlwtiier /11:
maid bring anyimng
back for 2!. The bird
{1$‘f((.’(l for in‘ frecdrml,
Inn was refused. So he
u.\‘l<cr! rim rm'rr/rant to
visit :1 jmlglt: Ill India
and announce his
caplivily lo the [rev
birds whn were there.
The mnrtrhrlrit rift] S17.
and no .S‘(I(IHk'!’ had he
sprxicm wlmn :1 wild
bird, just like his own.
fell senseless no: of :1
mac an to the ground.
Tim merchant Ilzoughr
that this must by a role»
rive afliix own bird,
und /bl: xml rlmt he
slzould have mural t/tis
detlrh.
When he got home, the
hm! a.i'k¢=zl' him whrrtller
he had brought good
news from India,
"No.".wr1'r1 the
anew'chzm!_ “Ifeel that
my news: is him. (Me of
2!!) LAW 26
relative who had fallen into debt. But although Soemon had managed to
bail out his relative, he had simply displaced the burden onto himself.
Daizen knew Soemon well—-he neither cared not understood much about
money, and could easily get into trouble through slowness in repaying the
loan, which had been made by it wealthy merchant called Kawachiya
Sanemon. Yet if Daizen offered to help Soemon pay back the loam, he
would refuse, out of pride, and might even be offended.
One day Daizen visited his friend, and after touring the garden and
looking at Soemon’s prized peonies, they retired to his reception room.
Here Daizen saw a painting by the master Kano Tennyu. “Ah,” Daizen exclaimed, “a splendid piece of painting. . . . I don’t know when I have seen
anything I like better.” After several more bouts of praise, Soemon had no
choice: “Well,” he said, “since you like it so much, I hope you will do me
the favor of accepting it.”
At first Daizen refused, but when Soemon insisted he gave in. The
next day Soemon in turn received a package from Daizen. Inside it was a
beautiful and delicate vase, which Daizen, in an accompanying note, asked
his friend to accept as a token of his appreciation for the painting that Soe~
mon had so graciously given him the day before. He explained that the
vase had been made by Sen no Rikyu himself, and bore an inscription
from Emperor Hideyoshi. If Soemon did not care for the vase, Daizen sug~
gested, he might make a gift of it to an adherent of Cha«no—yu—-perhaps
the merchant Kawachiya Sanemon, who had often expressed a desire to
possess it. “I hear,” Daizen continued, “he has a fine piece of fancy paper
[the 3()()~ryo I.O.U.] which you would much like. It is possible you might
arrange an exchange.”
Realizing what his gracious friend was up to, Soemon took the vase to
the wealthy lender. “However did you get this,” exclaimed Sanemon,
when Soemon showed him the vase. “I have often heard of it, but this is the
first time I have ever seen it. It is such a treasure that it is never allowed
outside the gate!” He instantly offered to exchange the debt note for the
flower vase, and to give Soemon 300 ryo more on top of it. But Socmon,
who did not care for money, only wanted the debt note back, and
Sanemon gladly gave it to him. Then Soemon immediately hunied to
Daizen’s house to thank him for his clever support
Interpretation
Kuriyama Daizen understood that the granting of a favor is never simple:
If it is done withfuss and obviousness, its receiver feels burdened by an
obligation. This may give the door a certain power, but it is a
power that
will eventually self-destruct, for it will stir up resentment and resistance. A
favor done indirectly and elegantly has ten times more power. Daizen
knew a direct approach would only have offended Soemon. By letting his
friend give him the painting, however, he made Soemon feel that he too
had pleased his friend with a gift. In the end, all three parties emerged from
the encounter feeling fulfilled in their own way.
In essence, Daizen made himself the cat’s-paw, the tool to take the
chestnuts out of the fire. He must have felt some pain in losing the vase, but
he gained not only the painting but, more important, the power of the
courtier. The courtier uses his gloved hand to soften any blows against him,
disguise his scars, and make the act of rescue more elegant and clean. By
helping others, the courtier eventually helps himself. Daizen’s example
provides the paradigm for every favor done between friends and peers:
never impose your favors. Search out ways to make yourself the cat’s—paw,
indirectly extricating your friends from distress without imposing yourself
or making them feel obligated to you.
One should not be too stmightfnrward. Go and see thefzmesz.
The straight trees are cut down, the crooked ones are left standing.
Kuulilya, Indian fzhiloroplmg third century Ii.(1'.
KEYS TO POWER
As a leader you may imagine that constant diligence, and the appearance
of working harder than anyone else, signify power. Actually, though, they
have the opposite effect: They imply weakness. Why are you working so
hard? Perhaps you are incompetent, and have to put in extra effort just to
keep up; perhaps you are one of those people who does not know how to
delegate, and has to meddle in everything. The truly powerful, on the other
hand, seem never to be in a hurry or overburdened. While others work
their fingers to the bone, they take their leisure. They know how to find the
right people to put in the effort while they save their energy and keep their
hands out of the fire. Similarly, you may believe that by taking on the dirty
work yourself, involving yourself directly in unpleasant actions, you impose your power and instill fear. In fact you make yourself look ugly, and
abusive of your high position. Truly powerful people keep their hands
clean. Only good things surround them, and the only announcements they
make are of glorious achievements.
You will often find it necessary, of course, to expend energy, or to ef
fact an evil but necessary action. But you must never appear to be this action’s agent. Find 3. cat’s—paw. Develop the arts of finding, using, and, in
time, getting rid of these people when their cat’s-paw role has been fulfilled.
On the eve of an important river battle, the great third—century Chi
nese strategist Chuko Liang found himself falsely accused of secretly work
ing for the other side. As proof of his loyalty, his commander ordered him
to produce 100,000 arrows for the army within three days, or be put to
death. Instead of trying to manufacture the arrows, an impossible task,
Liang took a dozen boats and had bundles of straw lashed to their sides. In
the late afternoon, when mist always blanketed the river, he floated the
boats toward the enemy camp. Fearing a
trap from the wily Chuko Liang,
the enemy did not attack the barely visible boats with boats of their own,
your rclalinm
collapsed tum‘, fell at my
feet when I mmziunwl
your captivity.
"
As won as these wurtls
were xlmken the
merclumt iv bird
mllapx::(l and fell to
the bottom ofthe urge.
“The news aflzis kirxxv
man '3 (loath has killed
him, run.
”
/huught the
merchant. Sorrowful!)
he picked up the bird
and put it on Hlze
wirzduw.\ill. Al once
the bird ruvwcd mm’
flew to 41 nextrby mac.
“Now you know. "
1/24:
bird mul, “(hm what
you I/laugh: was rlimse
(or was in fact good
news for VIM’. Ami how
the rrmmlge, the
suggc.sIioIz of how In
behtzvc in eI!’dt’!’ to fret’
m_yseIfi was rmnsmzzml
to me through you, my
captur. "And heflaw
mmy, free at last.
m1_|=s <>r"m1«_
DFRVISHEES.
l|)l{lIiS SH/\u,1967
LAW 26 211
l),\\'lD XVI) Il.\'l‘|l*1llV,|i\
.4! {he tum ofthe year,
what; kmgx take the
fluid, David scm ,/oab
out with his other offiwrs and all the Lwaeliu'
forces, and they
rxtvtzged Amman and
laid .V'i(‘gl' In Rubhah,
while David nzmuinetl
in Jerm-alum. Om’
evening David got up
front his mud: and, as
he waikrd about on {he
ruofof the pulaw, he
saw from thFri—' a
wmmm bathéng am!
xhe was very beautiful.
He vmr rn inquire who
slit‘ was: and the answer
came, “It muse‘ he
Ihztlzx/zeba. daughter of
Elium and wife of
Uriah the Hirriw , .
David wrote a letter to
Joub and sent Uriah
with it. HP wmm in (11?
lrtrnr: “Put Uriah
opposite the enemy
where the fighléng is
fiercest ant? than fit}!
buck, and lcswe him :0
meet his death. ". . .
Joab .. .xfmitzned
Uriah :1: or point where
he knew Ilzry would
put up a xtouljighi. The
men oflhe (fly ta/lied
am and or|g1zgr,’rl.h)uh.
and some of David‘:-
guards fell; Uriah I/ze
Hzlme was zzlvo killed.
Jouh sem David a
dis';m1Ch wirh all the
news ofrhe battle. . . ,
When I_:’rwh'.\‘ wife
hoard {hm her husband
was‘ clvsad, size mrmrnezt
for him; and when the
period ofmrzuming
M15 oval: David set»:
for her and brought her
into hm house. She
became his wife and
bore him a SOIL.
or on waxru.
2 5AM1.r.L. ll --I2
212 LAW 26
but showered them with arrows from the bank. As Liang’s boats inched
closer, they redoubled the rain of arrows, which stuck in the thick straw.
After several hours, the men hiding on board sailed the vessels quickly
downstream, where Chuko Liang met them and collected his 100,000
arrows.
Chuko Liang would never do work that others could do for lu‘m—-he
was always thinking up tricks like this one. The key to planning such a
strategy is the ability to think far ahead, to imagine ways in which other
people can be baited into doing the job for you.
An essential element in making this strategy work is to disguise your
goal, shrouding it in mystery, like the strange enemy boats appearing
dimly in the mist. When your rivals cannot be sure what you are after, they
will reaxzt in ways that often work against them in the long run. In fact they
will become your ca3.’s-paws. Ifyou disguise your intentions, it is much easier to guide them into moves that accomplish exactly what you want done,
but prefer not to do yourself. This may require planning several moves in
advance, like a billiard ball that bounces off the sides a few times before
heading into the right pocket;
The early-twentieth-century American con artist Yellow Kid Weil
knew that no matter how skillfully he horned in on the perfect wealthy
sucker, if he, a stranger, approached this man directly, the sucker might become suspicious. So Weil would find someone the sucker already knew to
serve as a cat‘s—paw——-someone lower on the totem pole who was himself
an unlikely target, and would therefore be less suspicious. Weil would interest this man in a scheme promising incredible wealth. Convinced the
scheme was for real, the cat’s—paw would often suggest, without prompting,
that his boss or wealthy friend should get involved: Having more cash to
invest, this man would increase the size of the pot. making bigger bucks for
all concerned. The cat‘s-paw would then involve the wealthy sucker who
had been Weil’-s target all along, but who would not suspect a
trap, since it
was his trusty subordinate who had roped him in. Devices like this are
often the best way to approach a
person of power: Use an associate or sub
ordinate to hook you up with your primary target. The cat’s-paw estalr
lishes your credibility and shields you from the unsavory appearance of
being too pushy in your courtship.
The easiest and most effective way to use a cat’s-paw is often to plant
information with him that he will then spread to your primary target. False
or planted information is a powerful tool, especially if spread by a dupe
whom no one suspects. You will find it very easy to play innocent and disguise yourself as the source.
The strategic therapist Dr. Milton H. Erickson would often encounter
among his patients a married couple in which the wife Wanted the therapy
but the husband absolutely refused it Rather than wasting energy trying to
deal with the man directly, Dr. Erickson would see the wife alone, and as
she talked he would interject interpretations of the husband’s behavior that
he knew would rile the husband up if he heard them. Sure enough, the wife
would tell her husband what the doctor had said. After a few weeks the
husband would he so furious he would insist on joining his wife in the sessions so he could set the doctor straight.
Finally, you may well find cases in which deliberately offering yourself
as the cat’s-paw will ultimately gain you great power. This is the ruse of the
perfect courtier. Its symbol is Sir Walter Raleigh, who once placed his own
cloak on the muddy ground so that Queen Elizabeth would not sully her
shoes. As the instrument that protects a master or peer from unpleasant
ness or danger, you gain immense respect, which sooner or later will pay
dividends. And remember: If you can make your assistance subtle and gra—
cious rather than boastful and burdensome, your recompense will be that
much the more satisfying and powerful.
Image: The Cat’s-Paw.
It has long claws to grab
things. It is soft and
padded. Take hold of the cat
and use its paw to pluck
things out of the lire, to claw
your enemy, to play with the
mouse before devouring it.
Sometimes you hurt the
cat, but most often it
doesn't feel a
thing.
Authority: Do everything pleasant yourself, everything unpleasam through third parties. By adopting the first course you win
favor, by taking the second you deflect ill will. lmp()l‘laI1l. affairs
often require rewards and punishments. Let only the good come
from you and the evil from others. (Baltasar Graciém, lti0l—l658)
LAW 26 213
214 LAW 26
REVERSAI.
The cat’s~paw and the scapegoat must be used with extreme caution and
delicacy. They are like screens that hide your own involvement in dirty
work from the public; if at any moment the screen is lifted and you are
seen as the manipulator, the puppet master, the whole dynamic aims
around—your hand will be seen everywhere, and you will be blamed for
misfortunes you may have had nothing to do with. Once the truth is re
vealed, events will snowball beyond your control.
In 1572, Queen Catherine de’ Médicis of France conspired to do away
with Gaspard de Coligny, an admiral in the French navy and a
leading
member of the Huguenot (French Protestant) community. Coliguy was
close to Catherine’s son, Charles IX, and she feared his growing influence
on the young king. So she arranged for a member of the Guise family, one
of the most powerful royal clans in France, to assassinate him.
Secretly, however, Catherine had another plan: She Wanted the Huguenots to blame the Guises for killing one of their leaders, and to take re
venge. With one blow, she would erase or injure two threatening rivals,
Coligny and the Guise family. Yet both plans went awry. The assassin
missed his target, only wounding Coligny; knowing Catherine as his
enemy, he strongly suspected it was she who had set up the attack on him,
and he told the king so. Eventually the failed assassination and the arguments that ensued from it set off a chain of events that led to a bloody civil
war between Catholics and Protestants, culminating in the horrifying Mas
sacre of St. Bartholomew’s Eve, in which thousands of Protestants were
killed.
If you have to use a cat’s—paw or a
scapegoat in an action of great consequence, be very careful: Too much can go wrong. It is often wiser to use
such dupes in more innocent endeavors, where mistakes or miscalculations
will cause no serious harm.
Finally, there are moments when it is advantageous to not disguise
your involvement or responsibility, but rather to take the blame yourself
for some mistake. If you have power and are secure in it, you should some
times play the penitent: With a sorrowful look, you ask for forgiveness
from those weaker than you. It is the ploy of the king who makes a show of
his own sacrifices for the good of the people. Similarly, upon occasion you
may want to appear as the agent of punishment in order to instill fear and
trembling in your subordinates. Instead of the ca.t‘s~paw you show your
own mighty hand as a
threatening gesture. Play such a card sparingly. If
you play it too often, fear will turn into resentment and hatred. Before you
know it, such emotions will spark a vigorous opposition that will someday
bring you down. Get in the habit of using a cat’s-paw——it is far safer.
LAW
27
PLAY ON PEOPLE’S NEED
TO BELIEVE TO CREATE A
CULTLIKE FOLLOWING
JUDGMENT
People have an a-uerwhelming desire to believe in some»
thing. Become the focal point of such desire by qflmng
them a cause, a new faith to follow. Keep your words
vague butfull £_1f[l7‘()miSI?,' emphasize enthusiasm over mtionality and clear thinking. Give your new disciples rituals to peifom, ask them to make sacrifices on your
behaifl In the absence of organized religion and grand,
emeses, your new beiief system will bring you imtald
powex
It wus In the clzarlatarzir
uzlvanmgrt that the individuals prezlisposed to
rredulily skortid marital
ply, that the groups o
f
his adherents should
enlarge lo mas:
proportions, guaranteeing an ever greater
scope for his m'umpIi.s:
And this was in fact to
occur, ll.l' science was
popularizied, from the
Remzzsmnce on down
rhrouglz wcceeding
cenrlzriirs. With the
imrnense growth of
krmwlredgre and its
wrtead tlmmgli prinI~
ing in mmlenri times,
the rrxmw of the half
edzwulvd, the eagerl_v
gullible prey ofihe
qllack, also increu.s‘e¢1,
[Iemrrze indeed a
nmjorify; roal power
could bf’ based on their
wixfzns. <)])ini(ms, preferences. and rejections.
The ch/Ir/mun’s empire
accordingly widwied
with the modern
tlfiyseminizliorr of
knowledge; .s'irrn* hf‘
opcramrl on lhre basis
of h‘Clt!I1C(’, however
much he perverted ii,
prottzwing gold with a
Icriznit/ue borrowed
from clicrrilstry and his
womlorful balsums
with /he rl[)[)[II£Itui' of
mctlidne, he could not
appeal 10 mt cmirely
ignomrzl foe‘/c. '1"/te illit~
emze would bu
protected ugaim! lulr
uh.snrdlrim' by their
hetIl1Iz_V common sense.
llis choicest umiimz.-e
would be ztompoxcaf of
the 5't’I7lllll('I1)!(’. thme
who had exclzangecl
thvir crmmzvn sense /2):
Ll litlle dixlorred infer.
marina and Imrl
216 LAW 27
THE SCIENCE OF Cl-IARLATANISM,
OR HOW TO CREATE A CULT lN FIVE EASY STEPS
In searching, as you must, for the methods that will gain you the most
power for the least effort, you will find the creation of a cultlike following
one of the most elfective. Having a
large following opens up all sorts of
possibilities for deception; not only will your followers worship you, they
will defend you from your enemies and will voluntarily take on the work of
enticing others to join your fledgling cult. This kind of power will lift you to
another realm: You will no longer have to struggle or use subterfuge to enforce your will. You are adored and can do no wrong.
You might think it a gargantuan task to create such a
following, but in
fact it is fairly simple. As humans, we have a desperate need to believe in
something, anything. This makes us eminently gullible: We simply cannot
endure long periods ofdoubt, or ofthe emptiness that comes from a lack of
something to believe in. Dangle in front of us some new cause, elixir, getrich-quick scheme, or the latest technological trend or art movement and
we leap from the water as one to take the bait. Look at history: The chronicles of the new trends and cults that have made a mass following for themselves could fill a
library. After a few centuries, a few decades, a few years,
a few months, they generally look ridiculous, but at the time they seem so
attractive, so transcendental, so divine.
Always in a rush to believe in something, we will manufacture saints
and faiths out of nothing. Do not let this gullibility go to waste: Make your»
self the object ofworship. Make people form a cult around you.
The great European Charlatans of the sixteenth and seventeenth ten»
turies mastered the art of cultmaking. They lived, as we do now, in a time
of transformation: Organized religion was on the wane, science on the rise.
People were desperate to mlly around a new cause or faith. The Charlatans
had begun by peddling health elixirs and alchernic shortcuts to wealth.
Moving quickly from town to town, they originally focused on small
groups—until, by accident, they stumbled on a truth of human nature:
The larger the group they gathered around themselves, the easier it was to
deceive.
The charlatan would station himself on a high wooden platform (hence
the term “mountebank”) and crowds would swarm around him. In a
group
setting, people were more emotional, less able to reason. Had the charlatan
spoken to them individually, they might have found him ridiculous, but lost
in a crowd they got caught up in a communal mood ofrapt attention. It be
came impossible for them to find the distance to be skeptical, Any deficiencies in the charlatan’s ideas were hidden by the zeal of the mass. Passion
and enthusiasm swept through the crowd like a
contagion, and they reacted
violently to anyone who dared to spread a seed of doubt. Both consciously
studying this dynamic over decades of experiment and spontaneously
adapting to these situations as they happened, the charlatans perfected the
science of attracting and holding a crowd, molding the crowd into followers
and the followers into a cult.
The gimmicks of the Charlatans may seem quaint today, but there are
thousands of charlatans among us still, using the same tried~a:nd—true meth~
ods their predecessors refined centuries ago, only changing the names of
their elixirs and modernizing the look of their cults. We find these latter»
day charlatans in all arenas of life-~business, fashion, politics, art. Many of
them, perhaps, are following in the charlatan tradition without having any
knowledge of its history, but you can he more systematic and deliberate.
Simply follow the five steps of cultmaking that our charlatan ancestors perfected over the years.
Step 1: Keep It Vague; Keep It Simple. To create a cult you must first
attract attention. This you should do not through actions, which are too
clear and readable, but through words, which are hazy and deceptive. Your
initial speeches, conversations, and interviews must include two elements:
on the one hand the promise of something great and transformative, and
on the other a. total vagueness. This combination will stimulate all kinds of
hazy dreams in your listeners, who will make their own connections and
see what they want to see.
To make your vagueness attractive, use words of great resonance but
cloudy meaning, words full of heat and enthusiasm. Fancy titles for simple
things are helpful, as are the use of numbers and the creation of new words
for vague concepts. All of these create the impression of specialized knowl
edge, giving you a veneer ofprofunclity. By the same token, try to make the
subject ofyour cult new and fresh, so that few will understand it. Done right,
the combination of vague promises, cloudy‘ but alluring concepts, and fiery
enthusiasm will stir people’s souls and a group will form around you.
Talk :00 vaguely and you have no credibility. But it is more dangerous
to be specific. If you explain in detail the benefits people will gain by following your cult, you will be expected to satisfy them.
As a
corollary to its vagueness your appeal should also be simple.
Most peop1e’s problems have complex causes: deep-rooted neurosis, inter
connected social factors, roots that go way back in time and are exceedingly hard to unravel. Few, however, have the patience to deal with this;
most people want to hear that a simple solution will cure their problems.
The ability to offer this kind of solution will give you great power and build
you a
following. Instead of the complicated explanations ofreal life, return
to the primitive solutions of our ancestors, to good old country remedies, to
mysterious panaceas.
Step 2: Emphasize the Visual and the Sensual over the Intellectual.
Once people have begun to gather around you, two dangers will present
themselves: boredom and skepticism. Boredom will make people go else
where; skepticism will allow them the distance to think rationally about
whatever it is you are offering, blowing away the mist you have artfully created and revealing your ideas for what they are. You need to arouse the
bored, then, and ward off the cynics.
encountered science
and education at some
time, thong/1 briefly
and un.s'ur¢:e.s-sful/y. , . .
The gieut rnasxr of
mankind has always
been predisposed to
marvel at mysteries,
and thil‘ was especially
true! at (terrain Iiisrorrk
periurls when the
Secure foundations of
life seemed shaken and
oltfvalues, ccorzamzc or
spiritual, long accepted
as cortairzliea. could no
longer be relied upon.
The» the zzumbrmr of
the clzarlaranis dupes
mulu'p1iedr—rhe “self
killers, "
as :2 sevenll.'emh~c<mmry Englishman called them.
’l'llE POWER 01-‘ rue
t:nA1U.A'I‘AN.
Gkrirr, or, Fxaxmsco,
I939
llil" OWL XYHU
\V'AS (41)!)
Onztr upon a starlets
mitlriight there was rm
owl who sat on the
branch of an oak tree.
Two ground moles
tried to slip quietly by,
tmnoliced. "You!"sm'd
the owl, “
W/m? "
they
quuvenrd. infear and
arzvmishrriezzr, for they
could not believe it was
possible for anyone [0
are them in than thick
dnrklwrs. “You two?"
said the owl. The moles
hurried away and told
the rather creatures of
the field and _forest that
the owl was the grcalrwl
and Wi.YE.S'f o/‘all
am'mal.s because he
could see in the dark
and because he could
artxwer any que.s'tt‘on.
“I'll see about that,"
said a Secretary bird,
nmrl he called on the
owl one night when it
was again very dark.
“How tmmy claws am I
holding up?
"
raid the
secretary bird. "Two,"
saitl the owl, and that
was right. “Can you
give me another
expression for ‘that l.‘.’
to say
'
or ’namely."‘
"
asked the secretary
bird. "To wit.
"
Said the
owl. “Why does’ a lover
call on his love?" asked
the secretary biril. “To
woo," said the owl.
The secretary bird
llll.S’l(’I’llitl lmtrk In the
other creatures and
reported that the owl
was indeed Iltt,’ grerttest
aml wisest animal in
the world because he
could see in the tlarlt
and because he vault!
lUl.\'Wt'f any (/tie. ion.
"Catt he see in the
zlu_vtt'me, too?" asked 61
red for, “
Yes, "
echoed a
durrrmure and a
Frertch poodle. "Fan he
see in the ilaytitrte,
too? "
All the other
creatures laughed
loudly at this silly question, and they set upon
the red fox and his
friends and drove them
out nftbe region. Then
they .l‘l‘I'II a
rnemtertger
to the owl and asked
him to be their leader.
When the owl appeared
among the uhintalr it
was high noon and the
sun was sltining
brightly. He walked
very slowly, which gave
him an uppearartire of
great dignity, and he
peered about him with
large, starirzg eyes,
which gave him an air
The best way to do this is through theater, or other devices of its kind.
Surround yourself with luxury, dazzle your followers with visual splendor,
fill their eyes with spectacle. Not only will this keep them from seeing the
ridiculousness of your ideas, the holes in your belief system, it will also attract more attention, more followers. Appeal to all the senses: Use incense
for scent, soothing music for hearing, colorful charts and graphs for the
eye. You might even tickle the mind, perhaps by using new technological
gadgets to give your cult a pseudo-scientific veneer-—as long as you do not
make anyone really think. Use the exotic—-distant cultures, strange customs—to create theatrical effects, and to make the most banal and ordinary
affairs seem signs of something extraordinary.
Step 3: Borrow the Forms of Organized Religion to Structure the
Group. Your cultlike following is growing; it is time to organize it. Find a
way both elevating and comforting. Organized religions have long held unquestioned authority for large numbers of people, and continue to do so in
our supposedly secular age. And even if the religion itself has faded some,
its forms still resonate with power. The lofty and holy associations of organized religion can be endlessly exploited. Create rituals for your followers;
organize them into a hierarchy, ranking them in grades of sanctity, and giving them names and titles that resound with religious overtones; ask them
for sacrifices that will fill your coffers and increase your power. To emphasize your gathering’s quasireligious nature, talk and act like a prophet. You
are not a dictator, after all; you are a priest, a
guru, a
sage, a shaman, or any
other word that hides your real power in the mist of religion.
Step 4: Disguise Your Source of Income. Your group has grown, and you
have structured it in a churchlike form. Your coffers are beginning to fill
with your followers’ money. Yet you must never be seen as hungry for
money and the power it brings. It is at this moment that you must disguise
the source of your income.
Your followers want to believe that if they follow you all sorts of good
things will fall into their lap. By surrounding yourself with luxury you become living proof of the soundness of your belief system. Never reveal that
your wealth actually comes from your followers’ pockets; instead, make it
seem to come from the truth of your methods. Followers will copy your
each and every move in the belief that it will bring them the same results,
and their imitative enthusiasm will blind them to the charlatan nature of
your wealth.
Step 5: Set Up an Us-Versus—Them Dynamic. The group is new large
and thriving, a magnet attracting more and more particles. If you are not
careful, though, inertia will set in, and time and boredom will demagnetize
the group. To keep your followers united, you must now do what all religions and belief systems have done: create an us—versus—thern dynamic.
First, make sure your followers believe they are part of an exclusive
club, unified by a bond of common goals. Then, to strengthen this bond,
manufacture the notion of a devious enemy out to ruin you. There is a
force of nonbelievers that will do anything to stop you. Any outsider who
tries to reveal the charlatan nature of your belief system can now be described as a member of this devious force.
If you have no enemies, invent one. Given a straw man to react
against, your followers will tighten and cohere. They have your cause to
believe in and infidels to destroy.
OBSERVANCES OF ’l‘l.-i E LAW
Observance I
In the year 1653, a
twenty»seven-ye-arclcl Milan man named Francesco
Giuseppe Borri claimed to have had a vision. He went around town telling
one and all that the archangel Michael had appeared to him and announced that he had been chosen to be the mpitano generale of the Army
of the New Pope, an army that would seize and revitalize the world.
The archangel had further revealed that Born‘ now had the power to see
people’s souls, and that he would soon discover the phi1osopher’s stone-a
longsought--after substance that could change base metals into gold.
Friends and acquaintances who heard Borri explain the vision, and who
witnessed the change that had come over him, were impressed, for Born‘
had previously devoted himself to a life of wine, women, and gambling.
Now he gave all that up, plunging himself into the study of alchemy and
talking only of mysticism and the occult.
The transformation was so sudden and miraculous, and Borri’s words
were so filled with enthusiasm, that he began to create a
following. Unfortunately the Italian Inquisition began to notice him as well—they prosecuted anyone who delved into the occult—so he left Italy and began to
wander Europe, from Ausuia to Holland, telling one and all that “to those
who follow me all joy shall be granted.” Wherever Borri stayed he at—
tracted followers. His method was simple: He spoke of his vision, which
had grown more and more elaborate, and offered to “look into” the soul of
anyone who believed him (and they were many). Seemingly in a trance, he
would stare at this new follower for several minutes, then claim to have
seen the person’s soul, degree of enlightenment, and potential for spiritual
greatness. If what he saw showed promise, he would add the person to his
growing order of disciples, an honor indeed.
The cult had six degrees, into which the disciples were assigned according to what Borri had glimpsed in their souls. With work and total de
votion to the cult they could graduate to a higher degree. Borri-—-whom
they called “His Excellency,” and “Universal Doctor”--demanded from
them the strictest vows of poverty. All the goods and moneys they possessed had to be turned over to him. But they did not mind handing over
their property, for Borri had told them, “I shall soon bring my chemical
aftremendous impor«
Il1l"!("t’. "H63 Gtxdl”
scnzurrmd a Plymouth
Rock hen. And the
or/zen molt up the cry
"He's God?" So they
followed him wherever
he went and wlmri he
began to bump into
things Ilwy began to
bump into zliings, (on.
Finally he came to (1
mrzcrely highway and
he started up the
middle ufii and all the
other crcamres
followed him. Presently
a hawk. who was acting
as outridrzr, observed a
(ruck mming toward
them arfifty miles‘ an
hum; and he rcprzrlctl
to {hit secretary bird
and the secretary bird
reported to the owl.
“Tlu?re’.r danger
tlliearl.
"
said the re: remry bird. “To wit?
"
said the nwl. The scoremry bird told him.
“Areri '1 you u[rtu't‘l."'
Ila asked. “Who? "
will
/he owl calmly, for he
could not .w«- (he truck.
"[Ie's God!" rind all
the ¢:re11ture.s‘ again, and
they were still cry-in‘i,~
"Heir God!" when the
mack hi: them and run
them down. Some of
the animals‘ were
merely mjurwl, [ml
most ofthem, imiludmg
the owl. were killed.
Moral: You can fun! too
many ofthe people too
much alike lime.
‘rm: ‘I1mkur.R
< ARNWAL,
JAMES Ti-iuzsr-Lu ,
l894~l 96$
LAW 27 219
Tn became the fmmdpr
ofa new religion one
must be psychologically infallible in one‘.s
kriowledge (Ifu cerium
average type ofsuuls
who have not yet
recognized that KIM)‘
belong together.
FRKEDRXCII NIETZSCHI-.
1844-1 ‘J00
Mm are so simpfe of
mind, and so much
cfmmrmrrrl by tlmr
immediate ueerls. that it
arreilful mun will
a1wa_vS_firid plerzzv who
are 1-eady to he
cleczzivcél.
Ni(‘(,()l.C) Nlz\('HlAV(~J L1.
l«169— i527
Till’, Tl-'.\l[’|,F
(W llIC\l'l'll
[In die lure I 7305] the
Srolnsli quark Jumas
Graham . . . was
winning a
large following and grztm richm in
Ixmdnn. . . .
[Graham]
maimtzimed a show a
f
great sL'icnti/it lL’(’]lniqzw. In 1772. 4 . he
had visited I"hiIuclelphiu. where he mm
Benjamin Franklin and
beamzr inn»rc.vml in
the lam-r‘v E'.V]7i’V'1rI!¢’Hls
with Pl£(‘Yrit‘iIV. 7’lw.vi>
upperzr to lmvrr Inspirierl
the apparatus in thr
“Temple of Ilealrh, "
220 LAW 27
studies to a happy conclusion by the discovery of the phil0sopher’s stone,
and by this means we shall all have as much gold as we desire.”
Given his growing wealth, Barri began to change his style of living.
Renting the most splendid apartment in the city into which he had temporarily settled, he would furnish it with fabulous furniture and accessories,
which he had begun to collect. He would drive through the city in a coach
studded with jewels, with six magnificent black horses at its head. He never
stayed too long in one place, and when he disappeared, saying he had
more souls to gather into his flock, his reputation only grew in his absence.
He became famous, although in fact he had never done a single concrete
thing.
From all over Europe, the blind, the crippled, and the desperate came
to visit Borri, for word had spread that he had healing powers. He asked no
fee for his services, which only made him seem more marvelous, and indeed some claimed that in this or that city he had performed a miracle
cure. By only hinting at his accomplishments, he encouraged people’s
imaginations to blow them up to fantastic proportions. His wealth, for ex~
ample, actually came from the vast sums he was collecting from his increasingly select group ofrich disciples; yet it was presumed that he had in
fact perfected the philosopher’s stone. The Church continued to pursue
him, denouncing him for heresy and witchcraft, and Borzi’s response to
these charges was a dignified silence; this only enhanced his reputation and
made his followers more passionate. Only the great are persecuted, after
all; how many understood Jesus Christ in his own time? Born’ did not have
to say a word—-his followers now called the Pope the Antichrist.
And so Borri’s power grew and grew, until one day he left the city of
Amsterdam (where he had settled for a while), absconding with huge sums
of borrowed money and diamonds that had been entrusted to him. (He
claimed to be able to remove the flaws from diamonds through the power
of his gifted mind.) Now he was on the run. The Inquisition eventually
caught up with him, and for the last Menty years of his life he was imprisoned in Rome. But so great was the belief in his occult powers that to his
dying day he was visited by wealthy believers, including Queen Christina
of Sweden. Supplying him udth money and materials, these visitors allowed him to continue his search for the elusive philosopher’s stone.
Interpretation
Before he formed his cult, Borri seems to have stumbled on a critical discovery. Tiring of his life of debauchery, he had decided to give it up and to
devote himself to the occult, a genuine interest of his. He must have no
titted, however, that when he alluded to a mystical experience (rather than
physical exhaustion) as the source of his conversion, people of all classes
wanted to hear more. Realizing the power he could gain by ascxibing the
change to something external and mysterious, he went further with his
manufactured visions. The grander the vision, and the more sacrifices he
asked for, the more appealing and believable his story seemed to become.
Remember: People are not interested in the truth about change. They
do not want to hear that it has come from hard work, or from anything as
banal as exhaustion, boredom, or depression; they are dying to believe in
something romantic, otherworldly. They want to hear of angels and out—of~
body experiences. Indulge them. Hint at the mystical source of some personal change, wrap it in ethereal colors, and a cultlike following will form
around you. Adapt to people’s needs: The messiah must mirror the desires
of his followers. And always mm high. The bigger and bolder your illusion,
the better.
Observance II
In the mid-17005, word spread in Europe’s fashionable society of a Swiss
country doctor named Michael Schiippach who practiced a different kind
of medicine: He used the healing powers of nature to perform miraculous
cures. Soon well-to—do people from all over the Continent, their ailments
both serious and mild, were making the trek to the alpine village of Langnau, where Schiippach lived and worked. Trudging through the mountains,
these visitors witnessed the most dramatic natural landscapes that Europe
has to offer. By the time they reached Langnau, they were already feeling
transformed and on their way to health.
Schiippach, who had become known as simply the “Mountain Doctor,” had a small pharmacy in town. This place became quite a scene:
Crowds of people from many different countries would cram the small
room, its walls lined with colorful bottles filled with herbal cures. Where
most doctors of the time prescribed foul-tasting concoctions that bore incomprehensible Latin titles (as medicines often do still), Schiippaclfs cures
had names such as “The Oil of joy,” “Little Flower’s Heart,” or “Against
the Monster,” and they tasted sweet and pleasing.
Visitors to Langnau would have to wait patiently for a visit with the
Mountain Doctor, because every day some eighty messengers would arrive
at the pharmacy bearing flasks of urine from all over Europe. Schiippach
claimed he could diagnose what ailed you simply by looking at a sample of
your mine and reading a written description of your ailment. (Naturally he
read the description very carefully before prescribing a cure.) When he fl»
nally had a
spare minute (the urine samples took up much of his time), he
would call the visitor into his office in the pharmacy. He would then examine this person’s urine sample, explaining that its appearance would tell
him everything he needed to know. Country people had a sense for these
things, he would say——their wisdom came from living a simple, godly life
with none of the complications of urban living. This personal consultation
would also include a discussion as to how one might bring one’s soul more
into harmony with nature.
Schiippach had devised many forms of treatment, each profoundly un~
like the usual medical practices of the time. He was a believer, for instance,
in electric shock therapy. To those who wondered whether this was in
keeping with his belief in the healing power of nature, he would explain
that electricity is a natural phenomenon; he was merely imitating the
the fabulous cwtulzllslu
man! he opmrzd in
London for the sale of
his elixim . . . In the
cluefraom. where he
received patients. srrmrl
“(lie lzzrgasi air pump
in the wurltl" to a.v.~.:’.\'t
him In his “plziln.mpl1rml rnvestigatiom” imu
disease, and also :1
"stupendous metallic
ccmrlucmr, ":1 rizlhly
gilded pedestal
mrmundml will: nrrorts
zm.-1 vials of "ellu:rial
and uther e.rst/rlres.
"
. ,
./lrcmcling In J.
Emzemoser. who
publislml :7 history of
magic in 1844 «I
Leipzig. (-‘mlmm 19
“hou.w . . . united the
u.n.-ful with the [l[(:‘ll.\llVable. Everywlmne (lie
ummsr magmficcnce
was rtzsplayerl. Even in
the‘ outer court. uwrrred
an reyc—wi(mz.\'.s‘. iz
scorned as 1/tough mi.
invemitm, rmd mthes
lmd been exhausted.
On the side walls in the
(T/IlIrIll7€I$ an arc»
shaped glow was
prtwitiea’ by artifiz-ial
elermr light; star rays
tlurled for/Ix,‘ transparem gl(I.\'.i't‘.\‘ ofall mlor.\'
were placed with clever
.\‘eIocIiun um! mm'lt
taste. All rlxi.\', the snmr»
cyewit I
* ‘
«mare: us,
was raw‘ ing and
exalted the inzagimzlimt
10 the higlicsl degree. "
Visitors were glvm u
prmmd sheet of rules
for flwzllhy llvinig. In
the Great Apollo
Aprmmem they might
join in mysterious v-im—
allsj. rtccrmzpanitrd by
chums‘: "llstil. Vital Air.
aerherml.’ «'Wagrzm'r'
Magic. hail."’Anri
while they hailed the
LAW 27 221
magic u_{m(1gnl’lism,
the windows were
durkltlmd. rttveulirzg a
ceiling smrldcrl with
eleclric .s'Irlr.\' and a
vmmg and lovely
“Rosy (jndrless of
Health" in a niche. . ..
I~,'ver_v evening this
Temple ufllealt/1 was
rmmlcd with glmsly; ll
had bccmnv I/‘IL’ I/2l.\‘l1t'(7N
I0 visil l[ and try the
great 1wetve—fuol bed’ of
Stun’, the "(x’r.su:zl C¢'l'e.\'-
(in! Bed,
"
said’ to cure
any disease. . . .This
bed. I2ccr>r(.’m_i; to
[fr;It(mm.\'H’. "stand in (I
vplemtid room. into
whit?/I 41 ¢‘yIim1er1(»d
from an adjoining
«lulmber In mndmtl the
/zertling currmts , . .at
(he xanze firm’ u/I .\'nrt.v
ofpleasing scents of
stnarzglhoning lmrhv
and Urzemal irzcertsc’
were also brought in
rlrmmglz glim tubes.
The heawenly Into’ itself
reslezl upon six solid
Inznsparem pillars‘; the
émilrlothes were of
purple and .\'icy~bz'ue
Ar/as silk, spread over
(3 Iilllitrffifll SOHl7("I‘.d
wizk Arubima perfumed
waters to suit the raster
oflhe I’cr.rim1 Court.
Tim chamber in w/zirrh
it wax‘ placed he called
the Sumrmm SllIl(‘I()-
rum. . . . Tu add to all
this, there wen’ the
nieludious l’l(ll(£S oflhe
harrrmtzicu. .s'o_/'?fIulc?.s.
ugreealile voices. and a
great organ.
”
"rm: POWER ()F'i'HE
um _
GRI','l'I‘_ or FRANK sco,
1939
22.. LAW 27
power of lightning. One of his patients claimed to be inhabited by seven
devils. The doctor cured him with electrical shocks, and as he administered
these he exclaimed that he could see the devils flying out of the man’s
body, one by one. Another man claimed to have swallowed a hay wagon
and its driver, which were causing him massive pains in the chest. The
Mountain Doctor listened patiently, claimed to be able to hear the crack of
a whip in the man’s belly, promised to cure him, and gave him a sedative
and a purgative. The man fell asleep on a chair outside the pharmacy. As
soon as he awoke he vomited, and as he vomited a hay wagon sped past
him (the Mountain Doctor had hired it for the occasion), the crack of its
whip making him feel that somehow he had indeed expelled it under the
doctor’s care.
Over the years, the Mountain Doctor’s fame grew. He was consulted
by the powerful—-—even the writer Goethe made the trek to his village——and
he became the center of a cult of nature in which everything natural was
considered worthy of worship. Schiippach was careful to create effects that
would entertain and inspire his patients. A professor who visited him once
wrote, “One stands or sits in company, one plays cards, sometimes with a
young woman; now a concert is given, now a lunch or supper, and now a
little ballet is presented. With a
very happy effect, the freedom of nature is
everywhere united with the pleasures of the beau monde, and if the doctor
is not able to heal any diseases, he can at least cure hypochondria and the
vapors.”
Interpretation
Schiippach had begun his career as an ordinary village doctor. He would
sometimes use in his practice some of the village remedies be had grown
up with, and apparently he noticed some results, for soon these herbal tinctures and natural forms ofhealing became his specialty. And in fact his nat—
ural form of healing did have profound psychological effects on his
patients. Where the normal drugs of the time created fear and pain, Schiip—
pach’s treatments were comfortable and soothing. The resulting unprovement in the patients mood was a critical element in the cures he brought
about. His patients believed so deeply in his skills that they willed themselves into health. Instead of scoffing at their irrational explanations for
their ailments, Schiippach used their hypochondria to make it seem that he
had effected a great cure.
The caseof the Mountain Doctor teaches us valuable lessons in the
creation of a cultlike following. First, you must End a. way to engage people’s will, to make their belief in your powers strong enough that they
imagine all sorts of benefits. Their belief will have a self—fullilling quality,
but you must make sure that it is you, rather than their own will, who is
seen as the agent of nransformaiion. Find the belief, cause, or fantasy that
will make them believe with a passion and they will imagine the rest, wor«
shipping you as healer, prophet, genius, whatever you like.
Second, Schlippach teaches us the everlasting power of belief in nature, and in simplicity. Nature, in reality, is full of much that is terrifyingpoisonous plants, fierce animals, sudden disasters, plagues. Belief in the
healing, comforting quality of nature is really a constructed myth, a roman«
ticism. But the appeal to nature can bring you great power, especially in
complicated and stressful times.
This appeal, however, must be handled right. Devise a kind of theater
of nature in which you, as the director, pick and choose the qualities that lit
the romanticism of the times. The Mountain Doctor played the part to perfection, playing up his homespun wisdom and wit, and staging his cures as
dramatic pieces. He did not make himself one with nature; instead he
molded nature into a cult, an artificial construction, To create a “natural”
effect you actually have to work hard, making nature theatrical and delightfully pagan. Otherwise no one will notice. Nature too must follow
trends and be progressive.
Observance III
In 1788, at the age of fifty-five, the doctor and scientist Franz Mesmer was
at a crossroads. He was a pioneer in the study of animal magnetism-the
belief that animals contain magnetic matter, and that a doctor or specialist
can effect miraculous cures by working on this charged substam:e—but in
Vienna, where he lived, his theories had met with scorn and ridicule from
the medical establishment. In treating women for convulsions, Mesmer
claimed to have worked a number of cures, his proudest achievement
being the restoration of sight to a blind girl. But. another doctor who examined the young girl said she was as blind as ever, an assessment with which
she herself agreed. Mesmer countered that his enemies were out to slander
him by winning her over to their side. This claim only elicited more
ridicule. Clearly the sober-minded Viennese were the wrong audience for
his theories, and so he decided to move to Paris and start again.
Renting a splendid apartment in his new city, Mesmer decorated it ap~
propriately. Stained glass in most of the windows created a
religious feeling, and mirrors on all the walls produced an hypnotic effect The doctor
advertised that in his apartment he would give demonstrations of the powers of animal magnetism, inviting the diseased and melancholic to feel its
powers. Soon Parisians of all classes (but mostly women, who seemed more
attracted to the idea than men did) were paying for entry to witness the
miracles that Mesmer promised.
Inside the apartment, the scents of orange blossom and exotic incense
wafted through special vents. As the initiates filtered into the salon where
the demonstrations took place, they heard harp music and the lulling
sounds of a female vocalist coming from another room. In the center of the
salon was a
long oval container filled with water that Mesmer claimed had
been magnetized. From holes in the conta.iner’s metal lid protruded long
movable iron rods. The visitors were instructed to sit around the container,
place these magnetized rods on the body part that gave them pains or
problems, and then hold hands with their neighbors, sitting as close as possible to one another to help the magnetic force pass between their bodies.
Sometimes, too, they were attached to each other by cords.
Mesmer would leave the room, and “assistant rnagnetizers”—-—a.ll hand»
Hll, l’l7\\|’ll ()I‘ ,\ 1 II.
In flu’ town of
Tamwml liver! :2 man
by the mmw of Re-Ii
Fcivel. Om day. as he
rut in his Izouse deeply
absorber] in his
Taénmil. he hmrzl :1
laud r10i.w= rnmizie.
Wlwn hr: went to the
window he saw 41 I1)! 0/"
little [1r£1I1kSte‘l’.\’. "
lp In
some new piece of
17ztLsch:‘r'f.' no doubt. "
In‘
tlmug/2r.
"(.‘Izildmrt,. run quit‘/<1)’
Io (he .v,vmIg<1gue,
"
/10
cried, leaning out and
impruvzkirzg the firs’!
slur)‘ Ilwr mmurrvd In
him. You’/I rec: rlwrc’ a
rm m.nnrIer, and wine! a
monster! Iris (1 vrmlure
my}: five jiéc-1. three
eyes. am! a hmrd [ikv
that 0/'/1 goat, only ir‘r
gram.’ "
/md sum momgh the
clrfldrnn scumpvra! 0/]
and Rel) Feivci
returned It) his .s'Iurli(3.\‘.
Hz: miilrza’ into his
/Ivan! at he tlmuglzl u
f
(Fm trick he hml played
.97; £11056 lilrlc ramcals‘.
[I warn '1 long ln'_I'<m.‘
his .s'I1uIic.\' were inforru[)1ca’agru‘n. this rtmw
by running f0Uf.YlL'pY.
Whm he went :42 (kc
window he saw several
Jews running.
“WImr(,~ um yzm
rzmningf’
"
ho mlluzl
om.
“
To flu’ ,sj_vI1agogus:’
"
answered Ihe Jews.
"Iluvun '1 you /ward?
'l'here’r u sou monsm-,
(hart/.s' u irreazurw with
five legs‘, three eves, and
a beard like that ofu
goal‘, tmly iI'.\ glwenl"
Reb /‘ave! lauglzml
will: glen’, thinking of
the trick /m had pla_w'£/.
LAW 27 223
und sat down again to
his Talmud.
But no somwr had he
begun to conczantrum
when surirlcnly he
heard a ditming tumult
outside. And what did
he See.’ A great crowd
ofmen, women and
children, all running
toward the .i'ynagugtw.
“What's up?” he cried,
sticking his head out of
the window.
“What a question.’
Why, don '1‘ you know?”
they atzswered. "Right
in from of the synav
gogue tltereii (I suu
monster. Ii’; :1 crmrure
with five logy, three
eyes, and a board like
that oft: goat, only
its ween!"
And as‘ the crowd
hurried by, Reh Feivcl
sudzlerily tiotirred that
the rabbi himsclf
was
among them.
“Lord of the world!"
he exclaimed. “lfthe
rabbi himself 15
running with them
vurely there niust be
something happening.
Where there‘: smoke
then: .5 fire!"
Without further
thought Rel) Fezvel
grabbed Iris hat, left his
house, and also
began running.
“Who can tell?" he
mutrmcd to Iumsclfas
he ran, all out of
breath, toward the
synagogue.
A 1'iu:Asi:RY or
J)-.WISH F()l,KLO[<E.
NAYHAN AU§UBtL, 21)..
1948
some and strapping young men—would enter with jars of magnetized
water that they would sprinkle on the patients, rubbing the healing fluid on
their bodies, massaging it into their skin, moving them toward a trancelike
state. And after a few minutes a kind of delirium would overcome the
women. Some would sob, some would shriek and bear their hair, others
would laugh hysterically. At the height of the delirium Mesmer would
reenter the salon, dressed in a
flowing silk robe embroidered with golden
flowers and carrying a white magnetic rod. Moving around the container,
he would stroke and soothe the patients until calm was restored. Many
women would later attribute the strange power he had on them to his
piercing look, which, they thought, was exciting or quieting the magnetic
fluids in their bodies.
Within months of his arrival in Paris, Mesmer became the rage. His
supporters included Marie—Antoinette herself, the queen of France, wife of
Louis XVI. As in Vienna, he was condemned by the official faculty of medicine, but it did not matter. His growing following of pupils and patients
paid him handsomely.
Mesmer expanded his theories to proclaim that all humanity could be
brought into harmony through the power of magnetism, a
concept with
much appeal during the French Revolution. A cult of Mesrnerism spread
across the country; in many towns, “Societies of Harmony” sprang up to
experiment with magnetism. These societies eventually became notorious:
They tended to be led by libertines who would turn their sessions into a
kind of group orgy.
At the height of Mesmer‘s popularity, a French commission published
a
report based on years of testing the theory of animal magnetism. The
conclusion: Magneu'sm’s effects on the body actually came from a kind of
group hysteria and autosuggestion. The report was well documented, and
mined Mesmer’s reputation in France. He left the country and went into
retirement. Only a few years later, however, imitators sprang up all over
Europe and the cult of Mesmerism spread once again, its believers more
numerous than ever.
Interpretation
Mesmer’s career can be broken into two parts. When still in Vienna, he
clearly believed in the validity of his theory, and did all he could to prove
it. But his growing frustration and the disapproval of his colleagues made
him adopt another strategy. First he moved to Paris, where no one knew
him, and where his extravagant theories found a more fruitful soil. Then he
appealed to the French love of theater and spectacle, making his apartment
into a kind of magical world in which a
sensory overload of smells, sights,
and sounds entranced his customers. Most important, from now on he
practiced his magnetism only on a
group. The group provided the setting
in which the magnetism would have its proper effect, one believer infecting
the other, overwhelming any individual doubter.
Mesmer thus passed from being a confirmed advocate of magnetism
tn the role of a charlatan using every trick in the book to captivate the pub-
lie. The biggest trick of all was to play on the repressed sexuality that bubbles under the surface of any group setting. In a
group, a
longing for social
unity, a
longing older than civilization, cries out to be awakened. This de~
sire may be subsumed under a unifying cause, but beneath it is a
repressed
sexuality that the charlatan knows how to exploit and manipulate for his
own purposes.
This is the lesson that Mesmer teaches us: Our tendency to doubt, the
distance that allows us to reason, is broken down when we join a
group.
The warmth and infectiousness of the group overwhelm the skeptical individual. This is the power you gain by creating a cult. Also, by playing on
people’s repressed sexuality, you lead them into mistaking their excited
feelings for signs of your mystical strength. You gain untold power by
working on people’s unrealized desire for a. kind of promiscuous and
pagan unity.
Remember too that the most effective cults mix religion with science.
Take the latest technological trend or fad and blend it with a noble cause, a
mystical faith, a new form of healing. People’s interpretations of your hy—
brid cult will run rampant, and they will attribute powers to you that you
had never even thought to claim.
Image: The Magnet. /in unseen force draws objects to it,
which in turn become magnetized themselves, drawing other
pieces to them. the magnetic power of me whole constantly
increasing. But take away the original magnet and it all falls
apart. Become the magnet, the invisible force that attracts
people’s imaginations and holds them together. Once they
have Clustered around you, no power can wrest them away.
Authority: The charlatan achieves his great power by simply opening
a possibility for men to believe what they already want to believe. . . .
The credulous cannot keep at a distance; they crowd around the
wonder worker, entering his personal aura, surrendering themselves
to illusion with a heavy solemnity, like cattle. (Grete de Francesco)
LAW 27 2:25
R EVE RSAL
One reason to create a
following is that a
group is often easier to deceive
than an individual, and turns over to you that much more power. This
comes, however, with a danger: If at any moment the group sees through
you, you will find yourself facing not one deceived Soul but an angry crowd
that will tear you to pieces as avidly as it once followed you. The Charlatans
constantly faced this danger, and were always ready to move out of town as
it inevitably became clear that their elixirs did not work and their ideas
were sham. Too slow and they paid with their lives. In playing with the
crowd, you are playing with fire, and must constantly keep an eye out for
any sparks of doubt, any enemies who will turn the crowd against you.
When you play with the emotions of a crowd, you have to know how to
adapt, attuning yourself instantaneously to all of the moods and desires that
a
group will produce. Use spies, be on top of everything, and keep your
bags packed.
For this reason you may often prefer to deal with people one by one.
Isolating them from their normal milieu can have the same effect as putting
them in a group—it makes them more prone to suggestion and intimidation. Choose the right sucker and if he eventually sees through you he may
prove easier to escape than a crowd.
28
ENTER ACTION
WITH BOLDNESS
JUD G M ENT
Ifyou are unsure ofa course ofactian, do not attempt it.
Your doubts and hesitatimzs will in/eat your execution.
Timidity is dangerous: Better to enter with boldness. Any
mistakes you commit thmugh audacity are easily corrected with more audacity. Everyone admires the hold; no
one honors the timid.
Illlz I \\ U v\I)\ Ii\ll R|.|h
The path of/1li?a.rur¢*
never lA'ad.s' to glory.’
The prodigious
achievements of
llrt'rule,s' were the
result ofhigh mittenlure, and though there’
is little, either in fable
or /tis‘It17v, to .\'lt(1w that
he had any rivals, still it
is t‘¢’c4)r(lrd [hat a
knight errant, in
company with a
fellow
txdvcnzurcr, sought his
_/ortima in a romzmtir
country. He had not
Irawlr*r1_far what his"
mmpiinitm oliserwrrl a
past, on which was
written the following
lrl,S'(‘,t’l[)l‘i(’Irt. “Iiravs
advlmiurcr. ifyou have
a zleiim (0 ilixmver that
which has never been
.\c't‘I1 by any knigltl
crrram, you have only
I!) pass’ this I0rrent_ and
than take in your arrns
an elephant ofrtmw
and carry it in one
breath to the .\untmi( of
this mountain, whose
nohh: head .wi'rru‘
blemlccl with the .» y.’
"But.
"
mid /ht‘ knight:
L‘()m[)(U1l()n, “the water
may be deep as well as
rapid, and though.
riotwithsramling, we
should [m.\‘.\' it, why
shottltl we be maimhrzrcrl with the
alepli/irit? What :1
?‘I(ll(‘L<l/Gus imdi=r1ahittgf" /lml /ihilosopl2irally and with nice
calculation, he
observed that the
£’l('p’lllIll might he
carried four steps: but
for cmtveying it to (hr
mp ofthc mozmtairi in
one breath, that was
not in lhzr power afa
mortal, mtlers it should
225 L AW 2 3
BOl.l)NF.SS AND HESITATION: A Brief Psychological Comparison
Boldness and hesitation elicit very different psychological responses in their
targets: Hesitalion puts obstacles in your path, boldness eliminates them.
Once you understand this, you will find it essential to overcome your natural timidity and practice the art of audacity. The following are among the
most pronounced psychological efiects of boldness and tirnidity.
The Bolder the Lie the Better. We all have weaknesses, and our efforts
are never perfect. But entering action with boldness has the magical effect
of hiding our deficiencies. Con artists know that the bolder the lie, the
more convincing it becomes. The sheer audacity of the story makes it more
credible, distracting attention from its inconsistencies When putting together a con or entering any kind of negotiation, go further than you
planned. Ask for the moon and you will be surprised how often you get it.
Lions Circle the Hesitant Prey. People have a sixth sense for the weaknesses of others. If, in a first encounter, you demonstrate your willingness
to compromise, back down, and retreat, you bring out the lion even in people who are not necessarily bloodthirsty. Everything depends on perception, and once you are seen as the kind of person who quickly goes on the
defensive, who is willing to negotiate and be amenable, you will be pushed
around without mercy.
Boldness Strikes Fear; Fear Creates Authority. The bold move makes
you seem larger and more powerful than you are. If it comes suddenly,
with the stealth and swiftness of a snake, it inspires that much more fear. By
intimidating with a bold move, you establish a precedent: in every subsequent encounter, people will be on the defensive, in terror of your next
strike.
Going Halfway with Half a Heart Digs the Deeper Grave. If you
enter an action with less than total confidence, you set up obstacles in your
own path. When a problem arises you will grow confused, seeing options
where there are none and inadvertently creating more problems still. Retreating from the hunter, the timid hare scurries more easily into his snares.
Hesitation Creates Gaps, Boldness Obliterates Them. When you take
time to think, to hem and haw, you create a
gap that allows others time to
think as well. Your timidity infects people with awkward energy, elicits embarrassment. Doubt springs up on all sides.
Boldness destroys such gaps. The swiftness of the move and the energy
of the action leave others no space to doubt and worry. In seduction, hesitation is fatal—it makes your victim conscious of your intentions. The bold
move crowns seduction with triumph: It leaves no time for reflection.
Audacity Separates You from the Herd. Boldness gives you presence
and makes you seem larger than life. The timid fade into the wallpaper, the
bold draw attention, and what draws attention draws power. We cannot
keep our eyes off the audacious———we cannot wait to see their next bold
move.
OBSERVANCES OF THE LAW
Observance I
In May of 1925, five of the most successful dealers in the French scrap
metal business found themselves invited to an “official” but “highly confidential” meeting with the deputy director general of the Ministry of Post
and Telegraphs at the Hotel Criilon, then the most luxurious hotel in Paris.
When the businessmen arrived, it was the director general himself, a Monsieur Lustig, who met them in a swank suite on the top floor.
The businessmen had no idea why they had been summoned to this
meeting, and they were bursting with curiosity. After drinks, the director
explained. “Gentlemen,” he said, “this is an urgent matter that requires
complete secrecy. The government is going to have to tear down the Eiffel
Tower.” The dealers listened in stunned silence as the director explained
that the tower, as recently reported in the news, desperately needed re
pairs. It had originally been meant as a
temporary structure (for the Expo»
sition of 1889), its maintenance costs had soared over the years, and now,
in a time of a fiscal crisis, the government would have to spend millions to
fix it. Many Parlsians considered the Eiffel Tower an eyesore and would be
delighted to see it go. Over time, even the tourists would forget about it—it
would live on in photographs and postcards. “Gentlemen,” Lustig said,
“you are all invited to make the government an offer for the Eiffel Tower.”
He gave the businessmen sheets of government stationery filled with
figures, such as the tonnage of the tower’s metal. Their eyes popped as they
calculated how much they could make from the scrap. Then Lustig led
them to a waiting limo, which brought them to the Eiffel Tower. Flashing
an official badge, he guided them through the area, spicing his tour with
amusing anecdotes. At the end of the visit be thanked them and asked
them to have their offers delivered to his suite within four days.
Several days after the offers were submitted, one of the five, a Monsieur P., received notice that his bid was the winner, and that to secure the
sale he should come to the suite at the hotel within two days, bearing a certified check for more than 250,000 francs (the equivalent today of about
$1,000,000)--—a quarter of the total price. On delivery of the check, he
would receive the documents confirming his ownership of the Eiffel Tower.
Monsieur P. was excited—-he would go down in history as the man who
had bought and torn down the infamous landmark. But by the time he arrived at the suite, check in hand, he was beginning to have doubts about
the whole affair. Why meet in a hotel instead of a government building?
Why hadrft he heard from other offieials? Was this a hoax, a scam? As he
listened to Lustig discuss the arrangements for the scrapping of the tower,
he hesitated, and contemplated backing out.
he the dwarffigurz? of
an eIeplmI£I,fi1oIzly tr)
be placed on the lap of
a stick; and (lien what
honor would more be
in such an advcznurel-"
"There i$,".vui1} ht’,
“some decepuion ."/1 rlrix
writing. It is an enigma
only fit to amuse a
Child, I slmli (ll?l’P_fl'>f€
leave you and your
elvplzant.
"
The reasmzer than
departed: but the
(«l(lV€FIf£€7‘0l\‘.S‘ "It'll!
ruslzed with his eyes
closed across the water.‘
neitlwz depth nor
I-‘iolencz prewmted
him, and according: to
the inscription he saw
Ihi? elephant lying on
Ilte opposite bank.
[Iv took it and carrier!
it to the tap c>/‘the hill,
where he saw a town. A
¥lIr’l(’l< from the
elcplmur uiamzerl the
people ufthe city. wlm
rose in arms.‘ but the
urlventurer, nothing
dazmtezl, was (latermi.-mi £0 die :1 llrtru.
‘Flu: people. however,
were awed by his presence, and he was avionislzetl to hear them;
proclaim him succexsor
to rlmlr king, who /mzl
rec-emly died.
Great enatr//ri.«'e.s are
only aciiieveri by
rzdwrnmrous spirits.
They who azlculurr
with you great niccty
cvz'r_y difficulry and
obstacle which is likely
to lie in their way, low
that limo’ in lwsinztirm.
which the mow daring
seize and remler available to the Ia/ties-I
purposes.
FABLLS,
.lF..-KN ma LA l"()t~<"lr\l!\i;.
1021-1695
LAW 23 ‘.329
Always set in work
without rnisgivrngs on
the .cmreu/’i1nprudcncc. Fear affailure
in the mind ufu
pcrfnrrmar is, for an
onlimkrrr, alrmriy
evidemse of/kzilure. . . .
Actions’ are dangerous
when there is doubt as
to their wi.\'zlorn.,'
it would be safer
to do rzotliirzg.
llAi:rA$AR (‘vRAL‘1A,~‘.
l60l 1658
‘IHI-ZS‘l(>I{\ M-
|ll»|IEz\l.\l.
In a
lowly thatched
outrage in (he Norman
Valley lll(’r(’ lived (1
[mar L:nu[rle_ Mr. and
Mrs. lluh Sacng.
The hmhaml mm,/inn!
/1iI?1.§¢’l/ft)?’ .s‘r:v(‘.n years
and nnly rmd Imnkx in
Ills cold room. . . .
Um’ duv his wife, all in
tears, Mild to him:
“look lwre, my goml
man! What is (he use of
all your book reading?
lhnvo spent my youth
in washing and sewing
for other people and
yet I have no .\'pan*
jackrrr orxkirt to wear
and I Imve had no fowl
to cut during llzepusl
Ihrec 11m/5. I um hungry
and cold, I can stand
it no monhl"
. .
.1IearingIhese
wants, the ntiddln-aged
xclzolur closer] his
Imuk .. .rave In hixfeel
and . . . witlwur suyirzg
urmrlwr wrml, hr’ wrnl
(mt oftlmms: . . . ./lrriv-
/rig in the heart Ufihe
230 LAW 23
Suddenly, however, he realized that the director had changed his tone.
Instead of talking about the tower, he was complaining about his low
salary, about his wife’s desire for a fur coat, about how galling it was to
work hard and be unappreciated. It dawned on Monsieur P. that this high
government official was asking for a bribe. The effect on him, though, was
not outrage but relief. Now he was sure that Lustig was for real, since in all
of his previous encounters with French bureaucrats, they had inevitably
asked for a little greasing of the palm. His confidence restored, Monsieur P.
slipped the director several thousand francs in bills, then handed him the
certified check. In return he received the documentation, including an impressive—looking bill of sale. He left the hotel, dreaming of the profits and
fame to come.
Over the next few days, however, as Monsieur P. waited for correspondence from the government, he began to realize that something was
amiss. A few telephone calls made it clear that there was no deputy director general Lustig, and there were no plans to destroy the Eiffel Tower: He
had been bilked of over 250,000 francs!
Monsieur P. never went to the police. He knew what kind of reputation he would get ifword got out that he had fallen for one of the most ab
surdly audacious cons in history. Besides the public humiliation, it would
have been business suicide.
Interpretation
Had Count Victor Lustig, con artist extraordinaire, tried to sell the Arc de
Triomphe, a bridge over the Seine, a statue of Balzac, no one would have
believed him. But the Eiffel Tower was just too large, too improbable to be
part of a con job. In fact it was so improbable that Lustig was able to return
to Paris six months later and “resell” the Eiffel Tower to a different scrapiron dealer, and for a higher price-—a sum in francs equivalent today to
over $1,500,000!
Largeness of scale deceives the human eye. It distracts and awes us,
and is so self-evident that we carmot imagine there is any illusion or deception afoot. Arm yourself with bigness and boldness—stretch your deceptions as far as they will go and then go further. If you sense that the sucker
has suspicions, do as the intrepid Lustig did: Instead of backing down, or
lowering his price, he simply raised his price higher, by asking for and getting a bribe. Asking for more puts the other person on the defensive, cuts
out the nibbling effect of compromise and doubt, and overwhelms with its
boldness.
Observance II
On his deathbed in 1533, Vasily III, the Grand Duke of Moscow and ruler
of a semi-united Russia, proclaimed his three-year-old son, Ivan IV, as his
successor. He appointed his young wife, Helena, as regent until Ivan
reached his majority and could rule on his own. The aristocracy—the boyars—secretly rejoiced: For years the dukes of Moscow had been trying to
extend their authority over the boyars’ turf. With Vasily dead, his heir a
mere three years old, and a
young woman in charge of the dukedom, the
boyars would be able to roll back the dukes’ gains, wrest control of the
state. and humiliate the royal family.
Aware of these dangers, young Helena tumecl to her trusted friend
Prince Ivan Obolensky to help her rule. But after five years as regent she
suddenly died——poisoned by a member of the Shuisky family, the most
fearsome boyar clan. The Shuisky princes seized control of the government and threw Obolensky in prison, where he starved to death. At the age
of eight, Ivan was now a despised orphan, and any boyar or family member who took an interest in him was immediately banished or killed.
And so Ivan roamed the palace, hungry, ill clothed, and often in bid
ing from the Shuiskys, who treated him roughly when they saw him. On
some days they would search him out, clothe him in royal robes, hand him
a. scepter, and set him on the throne——a kind of mock ritual in which they
lampooned his royal pretensions. Then they would shoo him away. One
evening several of them chased the Metropolitan———the head of the Russian
chu;rch—through the palace, and he sought refuge in Ivan’s room; the boy
watched in horror as the Shuiskys entered, hurled insults, and beat the
Metropolitan mercilessly.
Ivan had one friend in the palace, a boyar named Vorontsov who con»
soled and advised him. One day, however, as he, Vorontsov, and the
newest Metropolitan conferred in the palace refectory, several Shuiskys
burst in, heat up Vorontsov, and insulted the Metropolitan by hearing and
treading on his robes. Then they banished Vorontsov from Moscow.
Throughout all this Ivan maintained a strict silence. To the boyars it
seemed that their plan had worked: The young man had turned into a terrified and obedient idiot. They could ignore him now, even leave him
alone. But on the evening of December 29, I543, Ivan, now thirteen, asked
Prince Andrei Shuisky to come to his room. When the prince arrived, the
room was filled with palace guards. Young Ivan then pointed his finger at
Andrei and ordered the guards to arrest him, have him killed, and throw
his body to the bloodhounds in the royal kennel. Over the next few days
Ivan had all ofAndrei’s close associates arrested and banished. Caught off—
guard by his sudden boldness, the boyars now stood in mortal terror ofthis
youth, the future Ivan the Terrible, who had planned and waited for five
years to execute this one swift and bold act that would secure his power for
decades to come.
Interpretation
The world is full ofboyars--men who despise you, fear your ambition, and
jealously guard their shrinking realms of power. You need to establish your
authority and gain respect, but the moment the boyars sense your growing
boldness, they will act to thwart you. This is how Ivan met such a situation:
He lay low, showing neither ambition nor discontent. He waited, and when
the time came he brought the palace guards over to his side. The guards
had come to hate the cruel Shuiskys. Once they agreed to Ivan’s plan, he
struck with the swiftness of a snake, pointing his finger at Shuisky and giving him no time to react
Negotiate with a boyar and you create opportunities for him. A small
ciry, he .\'t0p]7ed a pzzsx»
iug gentleman. “Ilnllrz,
my friend.’ Who is; Ihc
richest mam in town? "
“Poor c:mmr_vman:’
Don’; yrm know Hyon»
SKI, the millionaire? IIi,\-
glirrering tile-ronfzed
house pierced by (welw
gate.\‘ is just over there.
Huh Srceng bent his
steps so the rich man It
house. Having entcrezl
the big gate. he flung
the guesr-roam door
open and adzlreryed the
/wrt: "I need I0.000
yang for rrapiml for my
¢:omm('rr‘.iai I)u.~'inc.\-s
and I won! you to ((1114
me the fllrlnry.
”
"/ilrigfzr, sir. Where
.\'IU!II [rend the
m()ney.‘7"
“
To the xlaimng Market
in can-, nfa mummxion merchant. "
“Very well, xix. I will
draw on Kim, who
(loses the bigger!
czwnzmisrirzn business’ in
the /ltrséng Mar/mt.
You ‘II get the monrey
(here. "
"Good-bye, sir."
V/hon Huh Sm.’/‘lg was
gone, all the other
gucsrr in the mom
asked Byfzn-.c.ri why he
gave so nmclz nmnev In
12 bcggurliire stranger
whose family name was
unknown to him. But
the rich man rrrplir.-41
with u
rrmmpharztfacn.‘
“Even though he war
in ragged (‘Ir/Ihei, he
.rpukr’ r:lr:m'1y to /he
point without bermying
shame or infsrirzriry.
unlike i-ommmz people
who want to borrow
money for 1! bad debt,
Such ti mun as he is
ritlmr mad or selfrorzfidmr in doing
business. But judging
from his iiacmrlers (’_VvL\'
amt booming voice he
LAW 23 3231
IS Ill! l1flC()YV‘lI?I0fl ?T?(1l"l
with 41 S[€p£’I'hl£f!l£]!!
brain. worthy afmy
trust. I know money
and I know men.
Money often makes a
man small, but 11 mm
like him makes big
mormy. I am only glad
to have helped :1 big
man do big business."
nr.mNn rm? Sl‘l-/N}‘:S
OF RUYAL PALACES
IN KOREA,
HA TAh—Hu~L;,
1983
Fear. which alvmyx
magnifies objects, give:
a body to all their
flznries. which mks: for
its form whatever they
conceive to exist m
their memiey tlmughm
so that fearful persons
selrlnrvz fail in fall into
real inmn veniertzres,
occasioned by imaginary dangers. . . .And
thee duke. whose
pnrdnminum character
was In be alwuysfult of
fear and tJfdiS!rI1.s‘t,
was. of all men I have
ever reen, the most
capable offalling into
falw steps by the dread
he had nffailing inlo
Ihcm; hr,-ing in that like
tmm hares.
CAKi’)l.‘«'AL DE Ru 2.,
l 613- 1:379
LAW 28
compromise becomes the toehold he needs to tear you apart. The sudden
bold move, without discussion or warning, obliterates these toeholds, and
builds your authority, You terrify doubters and despisers and gain the confidence of the many who admire and glorify those who act boldly.
Observance lll
In 1514 the twenty—two-year-old Pietro Aretino was working as a
lowly assistant scullion to a wealthy Roman family. He had ambitions of greatness
as a writer, to enflame the world with his name, but how could a mere
lackey hope to realize such dreams?
That year Pope Leo X received from the king of Portugal an embassy
that included many gifts, most prominent among them a great elephant,
the first in Rome since imperial times. The ponhff adored this elephant and
showered it with attention and gifts. But despite his love and care, the ele
pliant, which was called Hanna, became deathly ill. The pope summoned
doctors, who administered a
five—hundred-pound purgative to the ele
pliant, but all to no avail. The animal died and the pope went into mourning. To console himself he summoned the great painter Raphael and
ordered him to create a life-sized painting of Hanno above the animals
tomb, bearing the inscription, “What nature took away, Raphael has with
his art restored.”
Over the next few days, a pamphlet circulated throughout Rome that
caused great niernment and laughter. Entitled “The Last Will and Testament of the Elephant Hanna,” it read, in part, “To my heir the Cardinal
Santa Croce, I give my knees, so that he can imitate my genuilections. . . .
To my heir Cardinal Santi Quattro, I give my jaws, so that he can more
readily devour all of Christ’s revenues. . . .To my heir Cardinal Medici, I
give my ears, so that he can hear everyone’s doings. . . .” To Cardinal
Grassi, who had a
reputation for lechery, the elephant bequeathed the ap
propriate, oversized part of his own anatomy.
On and on the anonymous pamphlet went, sparing none of the great
in Rome, not even the pope. With each one it took aim at their best—known
weakness. The pamphlet ended with verse, “See to it that Aretino is your
friend / For he is a bad enemy to have. I His words alone could ruin the
high pope / So God guard everyone from his tongue.”
Interpretation
With one short pamphlet, Aretino, son of a
poor shoemaker and a servant
himself, hurled himself to fame. Everyone in Rome rushed to find out who
this daring young man was. Even the pope, amused by his audacity, sought
him out and ended up giving him a
job in the papal service. Over the years
he came to be known as the “Scourge of Princes,” and his biting tongue
earned him the respect and fear of the great, from the king of France to the
Hapsburg emperor.
The Aretino strategy is simple: When you are as small and obscure as
David was, you must find a Goliath to attack. The larger the target, the
more attention you gain. The bolder the attack, the more you stand out
from the crowd, and the more admiration you eam. Society is full of those
who think daring thoughts but lack the guts to print and publicize them.
Voice what the public feels--the expression of shared feelings is always
powerful. Search out the most prominent target possible and sling your
boldest shot. The world will enjoy the spectacle, and will honor the underdog—you, that is-—with glory and power.
KEYS TO POWER
Most of us are timid. We want to avoid tension and conflict and we want to
be liked by all. We may contemplate a bold action but we rarely bring it to
life. We are terrified of the consequences, of what others might think of us,
of the hostility we will stir up if we dare go beyond our usual place.
Although we may disguise our timidity as a concern for others, a desire not to hurt or offend them, in fact it is the opposite—we are really selfabsorbed, worried about ourselves and how others perceive us. Boldness,
on the other hand, is outer-directed, and often makes people feel more at
ease, since it is less self-conscious and less repressed.
This can be seen most clearly in seduction. All great seducers succeed
through effrontery. Casanova’s boldness was not revealed in a daring approach to the woman he desired, or in intrepid words to flatter her; it consisted in his ability to surrender himself to her completely and to make her
believe he would do anything for her, even risk his life, which in fact he
sometimes did. The woman on whom he lavished this attention understood that he held nothing back from her. This was infinitely more flattering than compliments. At no point during the seduction would he show
hesitation or doubt, simply because he never felt it.
Part of the charm of being seduced is that it makes us feel engulfed,
temporarily outside of ourselves and the usual doubts that permeate our
lives. The moment the seducer hesitates, the charm is broken, because we
become aware of the process, of their deliberate effort to seduce us, of
their self-consciousness. Boldness directs attention outward and keeps
the illusion alive. It never induces awkwardness or embarrassment. And
so we admire the bold, and prefer to be around them, because their selfconfidence infects us and draws us outside our own realm of inwardness
and reflection.
Few are born bold. Even Napoleon had to cultivate the habit on the
battlefield, where he knew it was a matter of life and death. In social set
tings he was awkward and timid, but he overcame this and practiced boldness in every part of his life because he saw its tremendous power, how it
could literally enlarge it man (even one who, like Napoleon, was in fact
conspicuously small). We also see this change in Ivan the Terrible: A harmless boy suddenly transforms himselfinto a powerful young man who commands authority, simply by pointing a
finger and taking hold action.
You must practice and develop your boldness. You will often find uses
for it. The best place to begin is often the delicate world of negotiation, parTflli HO Y .’l.'\l‘l
Tfili N ETT l J’,
A boy playing in the
fields got srwzg by a
nettle. He ran home to
his mother, telling her
that he had but Iouched
rim! nasty weed, and it
had stung him. “It was
just your touching it,
my boy,"sai1l the
mnthflf. “that caused it
to sting you; the next
rime you meddle with a
nettle, grasp it tightly,
and it will do you
no him. ”
Do boldly what you do
at all.
FAHLES,
Aasor,
sncm CENTURY Er).
lI\‘)\V T0 BF,
VliI'l‘l)l'll()llE-4 l.\ l..('l\r'l',
But with there who
have made an impression upon your heart, I
have noticed that you
are timid. This quality
might affecl a bourgeoise, but you mu.rt
attack the heart afa
woman ofllxr world
with other weapons. . . .
I well you an belmlfaf
women: lheff,’ l5 P10! 073?
ofizs who does no!
prefer a lime rough
handling to (on much
considemtimx. Men
lose rlzroaigll blundering more hearts than
virme saves. The more
limidity a lover shows
will; as the more i!
concerns our pride to
goal} him on; the more
respect he has for our
LAW 28 233
2.94
resz's1zzm‘e. the more
respeci we demaml of
him. We H’IJl«tl{l willingly .s'u_v lo you man:
"Ali, in pi!)/3 name do
not .~'uppo.rc us to lm so
very virtuous; you are
fgmmg u,.\‘ to have tun
much ofil. . .
Wt’ are continually
xmtggling to hide the
[act (ha! we futvrv
p('rmf!te(l tzurxelvex to
ho (overt. Put :1 wrmmn
in r: posiiizm to say that
slur has }rieirl:>a' only to
at .s'pecie. of w'(.>lem:e, or
to surprise: perszmrle
her {hat you do not
mzdcrmlm: her, and I
will r1lI,S'!1'€7f()r her
heart. A little more
boldness on your pan
would put you both at
your case. Do you
I‘t?rIl¢‘rI1l1(rr what M. de
la Rochcfoucauld {old
you Imely.‘ “A reasonable man in law? may
act like av mmlman,
bu! he slwultl mu
am! cmmm not like
an idiot. "
1 IFE, LETTERS, ANT}
I-‘m('m<F,A.~1 vuu,os0m4r
or NINON mi 1.1-; ‘
;\iNoN or Li1N('1.\'J:¥
16204 705
LAW 2 B
ticularly those discussions in which you are asked to set your own price.
How ofien we put ourselves down by asking for too little. When Christa
pher Columbus proposed that the Spanish court finance his voyage to the
Americas, he also made the insanely bold demand that he be called
“Grand Admiral of the Ocean.” The court agreed. The price he set was the
price he received--he demanded to be treated with respect, and so he was.
Henry Kissinger too knew that in negotiation, bold demands work better
than starting off with piecemeal concessions and trying to meet the other
person halfway. Set your value high, and then, as Count Lusfig did, set it
higher. ~
Understand: If boldness is not natural, neither is timidity. It is an acquired habit, picked up out of a. desire to avoid conflict. If timidity has
taken hold of you, then, root it out Your fears of the consequences of a
bold action are way out of proportion to reality, and in fact the conse
quences of timidity are worse. Your value is lowered and you create a self~
fulfilling cycle of doubt and disaster. Remember: The problems created by
an audacious move can be disguised, even remedied, by more and greater
audacity.
Image: The Lion and the
Hare. The lion creates no
gaps in his way——his
movements are too
swift, hisjaws too quick
and powerful. The
timid hare will do anything to escape danger,
but in its haste to
retreat and flee, it backs
into traps, hops smack
into its enemies’ jaws.
Authority: I certainly think that it is better to be impetuous than
cautious, for fortune is a woman, and it is necessary, if you wish to
master her, to conquer her by force; and it can be seen that she lets
herself be overcome by the bold rather than by those who proceed
coldly. And therefore, like a woman, she is always a friend to
the young, because they are less cautious, fiercer, and master
her with greater audacity. (Niccolo Machiavelli, 1469-1527)
REVERS/\L
Boldness should never be the strategy behind all of your actions. It is a tactical instrument, to be used at the right moment. Plan and think ahead, and
make the final element the bold move that will bring you success. In other
words, since boldness is a learned response, it is also one that you leam to
control and utilize at will. To go through life armed only with audacity
would be tiring and also fatal. You would offend too many people, as is
proven by those who cannot control their boldness, One such person was
Lola Montez; her audacity brought her triumphs and led to her seduction
of the king of Baxfatia. But since she could never rein in her boldness, it
also led to her downfall—-in Bavaria, in England, wherever she turned. It
crossed the border between boldness and the appearance of cruelty, even
insanity. Ivan the Terrible suffered the same fate: When the power of boldness brought him success, he stuck to it, to the point where it became a life
long pattern of violence and sadism. He lost the ability to tell when
boldness was appropriate and when it was not.
Timidity has no place in the realm of power; you will often benefit,
however, by being able to feign it. At that point, of course, it is no longer
iimidity but an offensive weapon: You are luring people in with your show
ofshyness, all the better to pounce on them boldly later.
LAW 2 B 235
29
PLAN ALL THE WAY
TO THE END
J U D GMENT
The ending is everything. Plan all the may to it, taking
into account all the possible consequences, obstacles, and
twists offirrtune that might reverse your hard work and
give the glory to at/zers. By planning to the end you will
not be overwhelmed by circumstances and you wid know
when to stop. Gently guide fortune and help determine
thefuture by thinkingfar ahead.
TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW
In 1510 a ship set out from the island of Hispaniola (now Haiti and the
Dominican Republic) for Venezuela, where it was to rescue a besieged
Spanish colony. Several miles out of port, a
stowaway climbed out of a
provision chest: Vasco Nufiez de Balboa, a noble Spaniard who had come
to the New World in search of gold but had fallen into debt and had estaped his creditors by hiding in the chest.
Balboa had been obsessed with gold ever since Columbus had returned to Spain from his voyages with tales of a fabulous but as yet undiscovered kingdom called El Dorado. Balboa was one of the first
adventurers to come in search of Colurnbus’s land of gold, and he had decided from the beginning that he would be the one to find it, through
sheer audacity and single—mindedness. Now that he was free of his creditors, nothing would stop him.
Unfortunately the ship’s owner, a wealthy jurist named Francisco Fernandez de Enciso, was furious when told of the stowaway, and he ordered
that Balboa be left on the first island they came across. Before they found
any island, however, Enciso received news that the colony he was to rescue had been abandoned. This was Balboa’s chance. He told the sailors of
his previous voyages to Panarna, and of the rumors he had heard of gold
in the area. The excited sailors convinced Enciso to spare Balboa’s life,
and to establish a
colony in Panama. Weeks later they named their new
settlement “Darien.”
Darien’s first governor was Enciso, but Balboa was not a man to let
others steal the initiative. He campaigned against Enciso among the
sailors, who eventually made it clear that they preferred him as governor.
Enciso fled to Spain, fearing for his life. Months later, when a
representative of the Spanish crown arrived to establish himself as the new, official
governor of Darien, he was turned away. On his return voyage to Spain,
this man drowned; the drowning was accidental, but under Spanish law,
Balboa had murdered the governor and usurped his position.
Balb0a’s bravado had got him out of scrapes before, but now his
hopes of wealth and glory seemed doomed. To lay claim to El Dorado,
should he discover it, he would need the approval of the Spanish king-—
which, as an outlaw, he would never receive. There was only one solution.
Panamanian Indians had told Balboa of a vast ocean on the other side of
the Central American isthmus, and had said diat by traveling south upon
this western coast, he would reach a fabulous land of gold, called by a
name that to his ears sounded like “Biru.” Balboa decided he would cross
the treacherous jungles ofPanama and become the first European to bathe
his feet in this new ocean. From there he would march on El Dorado. If he
did this on Spain’s behalf, he would obtain the eternal gratitude of the
king, and would secure his own reprieve—-only he had to act before Spanish authorities came to arrest him.
In 1513, then, Balboa set out, with 190 soldiers. Halfway across the
isthmus (some ninety miles wide at that point), only sixty soldiers reThero arc very few
men —aml they are [/10
exec/7tionA'—wl'to are
able to think amlfeel
beyond the present
moment
CARL vow C1./xusewnz.
1780- 1831
Till’. 'I \X 0 I“I€(?(l5
Two frogs dwelt in the
sums! pool. The pool
being drier! up under
the summer’: heat, rhey
left ii, and set out
together to seek
(mother home. As they
went along Ilwy
rlmncerl to pays (1 deep
well, amply supplied
with water, on Scemg
which one of the frogs
said to Iluc arlwrz “Let
us descend and nmke
our abode in this well,
it willfurnisli us with
shelter and food.
"
The
other replied Wtl/I
greater caurinrlr
“But suppose the water
shrmldfail us. how can
we get our aguinfmm
so grew 11 tlepllt?"
Do nothing without 11
regard to the conse-
£[M€IlC€5'.
EABLES.
AESOP.
SIXTH CENTURY Hr‘.
LAW 29 237
Look to the end, no
/nutter what it is you
an-, <'0rz.wrlm'ir2_1{. Often
enough. God gives a
man a glimpse of
hap[1ines.s. and then
mierly ruins him.
Tlll-1HlS‘l'()Rll"S,
lli.R0mm ,
Fll<‘I'Il L’i~:N'1‘i,R~r u. ,.
Wlli Kl\(. TH
‘
‘ll H
v\.\D Tlfli SI Rillinfl
In tlmfiem timer 1: king
ofTm‘mry was out
walking with mine of
his noblemen. A! the
rrmrlxide was an ahdul
(ii wzmderirig Sufi),
who cried out.‘
“Whoever will give me
a hundred dinars, I will
give him srmm
good advice.
"
The kingsm;>ped. and
xairl: "Abdul, wlmr it
(his good uclvice for a
hmzdred diners?
"Sir." answered the
abrlal, "m'cl’er (lie sum
10 be given to me, am)’ I
will tell it you immediately. "
The king did .m,
e.rpu‘iing in [war samething vxmxordiniiry.
The zlervish said /0
him: “My adv: IS this:
Never hvgin (my!/iing
until you have reflected
what will be rho end of
it."/if this the rzirbles
and everyone else
[7l<’.S’(f7lI laughed, mying
that the ahdnl hem’ been
wise so ask for his
money in advztnce But
the king swirl.’ "You
have no reaxmz to
laugh al the good
advice this ahdrll ltas
given me. No one is
LAW 29
mained, many having succumbed to the harsh conditions——the bloodsucking insects, the torrential rainfall, fever. Finally, from a mountaintop,
Balboa became the first European to lay eyes on the Pacific Ocean. Days
later he marched in his armor into its waters, bearing the banner of Castile
and claiming all its seas, lands, and islands in the name of the Spanish
throne.
Indians from the area greeted Balboa with gold, jewels, and precious
pearls, the like of which he had never seen. When he asked where these
had come from, the Indians pointed south, to the land of the Incas. But
Balboa had only a few soldiers left. For the moment, he decided, he
should return to Darien, send the jewels and gold to Spain as a token
of good will, and ask for a
large army to aid him in the conquest of El
Dorado.
When news reached Spain of Balboa’s bold crossing of the isthmus,
his discovery of the western ocean, and his planned conquest of El Dorado, the former criminal became a hero. He was instantly proclaimed
governor of the new land. But before the king and queen received word of
his discovery, they had already sent a dozen ships, under the command of
a man named Pedro Arias Davila, “Pedrarias,” with orders to arrest Balboa for murder and to take command of the colony. By the time Pedrarias
arrived in Panama, he had learned that Balboa had been pardoned, and
that he was to share the governorship with the former outlaw.
All the same, Balboa felt uneasy. Gold was his dream, El Dorado his
only desire. In pursuit of this goal he had nearly died many times over,
and to share the wealth and glory with a newcomer would be intolerable.
He also soon discovered that Pedraxias was a
jealous, bitter man, and
equally unhappy with the situation. Once again, the only solution for Bel»
boa was to seize the initiative by proposing to cross the jungle with a
larger army, carrying shipbuilding materials and tools. Once on the Pa—
cific coast, he would create an armada. with which to conquer the Incas.
Surprisingly enough, Pedrarias agreed to the plan—--perhaps sensing it
would never work. Hundreds died in this second march through the jungle, and the timber they carried rotted in the torrential rains. Balboa, as
usual, was undaunted»-no power in the world could thwart his plan—and
on arriving at the Pacific he began to cut down trees for new lumber. But
the men remaining to him were too few and too weak to mount an invasion, and once again Balboa had to return to Darien.
Pedrarias had in any case invited Balboa back to discuss a new plan,
and on the outskirts of the settlement, the explorer was met by Francisco
Pizarro, an old friend who had accompanied him on his first crossing of
the isthmus. But this was a
trap: Leading one hundred soldiers, Pizarro
surrounded his former friend, arrested him, and returned him to Fe
draiias, who tried him on charges ofrebellion. A few days later Ba.lboa’s
head fell into a basket, along with those of his most trusted followers.
Years later Pizarro himself reached Peru, and Balboa’s deeds were forgotten.
Interpretation
Most men are ruled by the heart, not the head. Their plans are vague, and
when they meet obstacles they improvise. But improvisation will only
bring you as far as the next crisis, and is never a substitute for thinking
several steps ahead and planning to the end.
Balboa had a dream of glory and wealth, and a
vague plan to reach it.
Yet his bold deeds, and his discovery of the Pacific, are largely forgotten,
for he committed what in the world of power is the ultimate sin: He went
part way, leaving the door open for others to take over. A real man of
power would have had the prudence to see the dangers in the distance——
the rivals who would want to share in the conquests, the vultures that
would hover once they heard the word “gold.” Balboa should have kept
his knowledge of the Incas secret until after he had conquered Peru. Only
then would his wealth, and his head, have been secure. Once Pedrarias arrived on the scene, a man ofpower and prudence would have schemed to
kill or imprison him, and to take over the army he had brought for the
conquest of Peru. But Balboa was locked in the moment, always reacting
emotionally, never thinking ahead.
What good is it to have the greatest dream in the world if others reap
the benefits and the glory? Never lose your head over a
vague, openended drearn—plan to the end.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
In 1863 the Prussian premier Otto von Bismarck surveyed the chessboard
of European power as it then stood. The main players were England,
France, and Austria. Prussia itself was one of several states in the loosely
allied German Federation. Austria, dominant member of the Federation,
made sure that the other German states remained weak, divided and sub»
missive. Bismarck believed that Prussia was destined for something far
greater than servant boy to Austria.
This is how Bismarck played the game. His first move was to start a
war with lowly Denmark, in order to recover the former Prussian lands of
Schleswig—Holstein, He knew that these rumblings of Prussian independence might worry France and England, so he enlisted Austria in the war,
claiming that he was recovering Schleswig-Holstein for their benefit. ln a
few months, after the war was decided, Bismarck demanded that the
newly conquered lands be made part of Prussia. The Austrians of course
were furious, but they compromised: First they agreed to give the Prusaians Schleswig, and a
year later they sold them Holstein. The world
began to see that Austria was weakening and that Prussia was on the rise.
Bismarck’s next move was his boldest: In 1866 he convinced King
William ofPrussia to withdraw from the German Federation, and in doing
so to go to war with Austria itself. King William’s wife, his son the crown
prince, and the princes of the other German kingdoms vehemently opposed such a war. But Bismarck, undaunted, succeeded in forcing the conflict, and Prussia’s superior army defeated the Austrians in the brutally
miuwarr: of the fact mm
we should think well
before doing anything.
But we are zlui/y guilty
ofrmr rcmtambraring.
and the cor1s¢'quenr.'e.s
are evil. fwiry much
vulut.’ !l'Ii.r dervish '5
advice, "
The king decizied to
bear the aa'vice always
in Iuir mind, and coin»
mamled it m be written
in gold on Ilie walls
and even engmved on
/zis Sl[V(‘J'[)l£1!<’?.
Not long flficrwanl a
ploller drasirzed to kill
the king. He bribed the
r’(1y££1.YIN'g(!t')n with a
pmmise of {he prime
rninistzrrxhip ifhe’ rlmm
a poisoned la/‘we; into
the king ‘X arm. Wlmi
the time mm: to let
sanm of the kings
hlaorl. ll silver basin
was placed ((7 catch the
blond. Sur1'(1enly the
rurgevn became smart‘
of the words engraved
upon lz: "Nmmr I;-rgin
rmlvtlzing umil you have
ref!(I(.‘lm'l what will be
the and of it." It was
only (hm llza! he realized that if/he planer
betramrt king he muld
lmw lhe surgeon killed
imtimtly, and would
not need to fulfill my
bargain.
The king. weing that
Vhr‘ surgeon was now
trembling. asked him
what was wrong with
him. And so he
(70IIf¢‘S5t’(l the truth. at
that very moment.
‘Ila-' plotter was seizetl;
and {lie king sem_for all
the people who hurt
hem prescrliz when this
abclal gave his advice,
and said In i‘llt?I1l.‘ “Do
you still laugh at the
rle/wish? "
(7.-\R,4\V/\N or DRFAMS.
lI>RllaS SHAII, 1968
LAW 29 239
He who nSk.tfnrtun0~
Iellers me future
unwittingly farfelfs zm
inm1rinlin’u1ti0Il of
coming events that is a
thousand times rnore
exact Ihan imyzhing
they may say
WAIJYER BENJAMIN.
l 8‘}2-- l 940
240 LAW 29
short Seven Weeks War. The king and the Pmssian generals then wanted
to march on Vienna, tak.i.ug as much land from Austria as possible. But
Bismarck stopped them--now he presented himself as on the side of
peace. The result was that he was able to conclude a
treaty with Austria
that granted Prussia and the other German states total autonomy. Bismarck could now position Prussia. as the dominant power in Germany and
the head of a newly formed North German Confederation.
The French and the English began to compare Bismarck to Attila the
Hun, and to fear that he had designs on all ofEurope. Once he had started
on the path to conquest, there was no telling where he would stop. And,
indeed, three years later Bismarck provoked a war with France. First he
appeared to give his permission to France’s annexation of Belgium, then
at the last moment he changed his mind. Playing a caband-mouse game,
he infuriated the French emperor, Napoleon Ill, and stirred up his own
king against the French. To no one’s surprise, war broke out in 1870. The
newly formed German federation enthusiastically joined in the war
on France, and once again the Prussian military machine and its allies
destroyed the enemy army in a matter of months. Although Bismarck
opposed taking any French land, the generals convinced him that AlsaceLorraine would become part of the federation.
Now all ofEurope feared the next move of the Prussian monster, led
by Bismarck, the “Iron Chancellor.” And in fact a
year later Bismarck
founded the German Empire, with the Prussian king as the newly
crowned emperor and Bismarck himself a prince. But then something
strange happened: Bismarck instigated no more wars. And while the other
European powers grabbed up land for colonies in other continents, he severely limited Germany’s colonial acquisitions. He did not want more
land for Germany, but more security. For the rest of his life he struggled to
maintain peace in Europe and to prevent further wars. Everybody assumed he had changed, mellowing with the years. They had failed to understand: This was the final move of his original plan.
Interpretation
There is a simple reason why most men never know when to come off the
attack: They form no concrete idea of their goal. Once they achieve victory they only hunger for more. To stop-—to aim for a goal and then keep
to it——seems almost inhuman, in fact; yet nothing is more critical to the
maintenance of power. The person who goes too far in his triumphs creates a reaction that inevitably leads to a decline. The only solution is to
plan for the long run. Foresee the future with as much clarity as the gods
on Mount Olympus, who look through the clouds and see the ends of all
things.
From the beginning of his career in polifics, Bismarck had one goal:
to form an independent German state led by Prussia. He instigated the
war with Denmark not to conquer territory but to stir up Prussian nationalism and unite the country. He incited the war with Austiia only to gain
Prussian independence. (This was why he refused to grab Austrian territory.) And he fomented the war with France to unite the German kingdoms against a common enemy, and thus to prepare for the formation of a
united Germany.
Once this was achieved, Bismarck stopped. He never let triumph go
to his head, was never tempted by the siren call of more. He held the rei.ns
tightly, and whenever the generals, or the king, or the Prussian people demanded new conquests, he held them back. Nothing would spoil the
beauty of his creation, certainly not a false euphoria that pushed those
around him to attempt to go past the end that he had so carefully planned.
Experience shows that, ifanef0Teset4.9_f1“amfaT away the designs to be
undertaken, one can act with speed when the moment comes to execute them.
Cardimzf ftichelieru, 1585-1642
KEYS TO POWER
According to the cosmology of the ancient Greeks, the gods were thought
to have complete vision into the future. They saw everything to come,
right down to the intricate details. Men, on the other hand, were seen as
victims of fate, trapped in the moment and their emotions, unable to see
beyond immediate dangers. Those heroes, such as Odysseus, who were
able to look beyond the present and plan several steps ahead, seemed to
defy fate, to approximate the gods in their ability to determine the future.
The comparison is still va.1id—those among us who think further ahead
and patiently bring their plans to fruition seem to have a godlike power.
Because most people are too imprisoned in the moment to plan with
this kind of foresight, the ability to ignore immediate dangers and pleasures translates into power. It is the power of being able to overcome the
natural human tendency to react to things as they happen, and instead to
train oneself to step back, imagining the larger things taking shape beyond
one’s immediate vision. Most people believe that they are in fact aware of
the future, that they are planning and thinking ahead. They are usually deluded: What they are really doing is succumbing to their desires, to what
they want the future to be. Their plans are vague, based on their imaginations rather than their reality. They may believe they are thinking all the
way to the end, but they are really only focusing on the happy ending, and
deluding themselves by the strength of their desire.
In 415 B.C., the ancient Athenians attacked Sicily, believing their expedition would bring them riches, power, and a glorious ending to the sixteen-year Peloponnesian War. They did not consider the dangers of an
invasion so far from home; they did not foresee that the Sicilians would
light all the harder since the battles were in their own homeland, or that
all of Athens’s enemies would band together against them, or that war
would break out on several fronts, stretching their forces way too thin.
The Sicilian expedition was a complete disaster, leading to the destruction
LAW 2!) .24!
of one of the greatest civilizations of all time. The Athenians were led into
this disaster by their hearts, not their minds. They saw only the chance of
glory, not the dangers that loomed in the distance.
Cardinal de Retz, the seventeenth-century Frenchman who prided
himself on his insights into human schemes and why they mostly fail, analyzed this phenomenon. In the course of a rebellion he spearheaded
against the French monarchy in 1651, the young king, Louis XIV, and his
court had suddenly left Paris and established themselves in a palace outside the capital. The presence of the king so close to the heart of the revolution had been a tremendous burden on the revolutionaries, and they
breathed a sigh of relief. This later proved their downfall, however, since
the court’s absence from Paris gave it much more room to maneuver.
“The most ordinary cause of people’s mistakes,” Cardinal de Retz later
wrote, “is their being too much frightened at the present danger, and not
enough so at that which is remote.”
The dangers that are remote, that loom in the distance-—if we can see
them as they take shape, how many mistakes we avoid. How many plans
we would instantly abort if we realized we were avoiding a small danger
only to step into a
larger one. So much of power is not what you do but
what you do not do——the rash and foolish actions that you refrain from before they get you into trouble. Plan in detail before you act—do not let
vague plans lead you into trouble. Will this have unintended consequences? Will I stir up new enemies? Will someone else take advantage of
my labors? Unhappy endings are much more common than happy
ones——do not be swayed by the happy ending in your mind.
The French elections of 1848 came down to a struggle between LouisAdolphe Thiers, the man of order, and General Louis Eugene Cavaignac,
the rabble-rouser of the right When Thiers realized he was hopelessly behind in this high—stakes race, he searched desperately for a solution. His
eye fell on Louis Bonaparte, grand-nephew of the great general Napoleon,
and a
lowly deputy in the parliament. This Bonaparte seemed a bit of an
imbecile, but his name alone could get him elected in a
country yearning
for a
strong ruler. He would be Thiers’s puppet and eventually would be
pushed offstage. The first part of the plan worked to perfection, and
Napoleon was elected by a
large margin. The problem was that Thiers
had not foreseen one simple fact: This “imbecile” was in fact a man of
enormous ambition. Three years later he dissolved parliament, declared
himself emperor, and ruled France for another eighteen years, much to
the horror of Thiers and his party.
The ending is everything. It is the end of the action that determines
who gets the glory, the money, the prize. Your conclusion must be crystal
clear, and you must keep it constantly in mind. You must also figure out
how to ward off the vultures circling overhead, trying to live off the carcass of your creation. And you must anticipate the many possible crises
that will tempt you to improvise. Bismarck overcame these dangers because he planned to the end, kept on course through every crisis, and
never let others steal the glory. Once he had reached his stated goal, he
withdrew into his shell like a turtle. This kind of selfcontrol is godlike.
When you see several steps ahead, and plan your moves all the way
to the end, you will no longer be tempted by emotion or by the desire to
improvise. Your clarity will rid you of the anxiety and vagueness that are
the primary reasons why so many fail to conclude their actions successfully. You see the ending and you tolerate no deviation.
lm age:
The Gods on
Mount Olympus.
Looking down on
human actions from the
clouds, they see in advance the
endings of all the great dreams that
lead to disaster and tragedy, And
they laugh at our inability to see beyond
the moment, and at how we delude ourselves.
Authority: How much easier it is never to get in than to get yourself
out! We should act contrary to the reed which, when it first appears,
throws up a
long straight stem but afterwards, as though it were exhausted . . . makes several dense knots, indicating that it no longer
has its original vigor and drive. We must rather begin gently and
coolly, saving our breath for the encounter and our vigorous thrusts
for finishing off the job. In their beginnings it is we who guide affairs
and hold them in our power; but so often once they are set in motion,
it is they which guide us and sweep us along. (Montaigne. 1533-1592)
LAW 29 243
244 LAW 29
REVERSAL
It is a cliché among strategists that your plan must include alternatives and
have a degree of flexibility. That is certainly true. If you are locked into a
plan too rigidly, you will be unable to deal with sudden shifts of fortune.
Once you have examined the future possibilities and decided on your target, you must build in alternatives and be open to new routes toward your
goal.
Most people, however, lose less from overplanning and rigidity than
from vagueness and a
tendency to improvise constantly in the face of Ci1‘~
cumstance. There is no real purpose in contemplating a reversal to this
Law, then, for no good can come from refusing to think far into the future
and planning to the end. If you are clear and fapthinking enough, you
will understand that the future is uncertain, and that you must be open to
adaptation. Only having 3. clear objective and a
far-reaching plan allows
you that freedom.
30
MAKE YOUR
ACCOMPLISHMENTS
SEEM EFFORTLESS
JUDGMENT
Your actions must seem natural and executed with ease.
All the toil and pmdice that go into them, and also all
the clever hicks, must be concealed. When you (let, not effortlessly, as zfyou could do much more. Avoid the temptation qf mrealing how hard you w01iz——-it only raises
questions. Teach no one your tricks or they wiii be used
against you.
245
l\ \\U §v\‘I\Y!
'\tl,\"l‘|'.i{ \I{T|h‘l‘
Dam Mt1.vrm1um' mire
sml for litrmyu to
zleconuc (1 pair of gold
.\'rrw'n.\- wven /r-er high.
The artist mid he
thought hEuck—:mrl—
wliita Sk1’l('}’i'{5i‘ would
sat‘! them, and went
home ttgdin ttfwr
t'otm‘rlt-rim: I/mm tram
fully. The man rtzztrniny
he came early and
made Lt large quantity
ofink into wlriciz he
dippctl o hrtrxexitme he
had hmugflit with him,
am! Ih£’V1 prm'€r*tie’d to
tnrtkr irnprmisitvrts of
this all over one of the
NC!
'
’I'Iu’t1. with a
Iarge brmh. he drew a
mtmln/r oflines aL'ro.s'.x'
them. Mcmtwlxilv
M./wamtmc had mme
m to watch his work’,
and ti! this he would
ctttlttitin his it'ri1il(i()It nu
longer. and tmmerittg,
“What It beastly nw.s.s'.'"
he .1'trm[(- away to lets
own [l]Ial‘(Nit’n!.$. The
re'miIwr.\' mld 'l‘amtyu
lit? was in a
very bad
h"m])!‘I‘ imleetl. “He
.vhottldrt't look on wlzi/1%
I am at work, (hon,
"
niplietl the painter. "lie
xhoulrl wait till 1'! is
/inixhctl.
"
Thm he took
up (I xtnttlirer ftrnxh and
dtmiml in touches‘ here
and (hum, and as he did
X0 i/xt‘prirxti' of the
Imt-.m-xlwe mum! mm
(‘Hi/)5‘, whifzz the big
broad fi'U'4tk(’.S' became
ruslmv. He then turned
to the other .\L’reL*r1 and
.vp[u.vI1r'tl {Imps nfink
all twrr it, and when he
had tu1¢led a few Ixrush»
xtmkes here and there
they bx.-nmzv rt ffzghr of
246 LAW so
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW I
The Japanese tea ceremony called Cha~no—yu (“Hot Water for Tea”) has
origins in ancient times, but it reached its peak of refinement in the six~
teenth century under its most renowned practitioner, Sen no Rjlcyu. Although not from a noble family, Rikyu rose to great power, becoming the
preferred tea master of the Emperor Hideyoshi, and an important adviser
on aesthetic and even political matters. For Rikyu, the secret of success
consisted in appearing natural, concealing the effort behind one’s work.
One day Rikyu and his son went to an acquaintance’s house for a tea
ceremony. On the way in, the son remarked that the lovely antique—look~
ing gate at their host’s house gave it an evocatively lonely appearance. “I
don’t think so,” replied his father, “it looks as though it had been brought
from some mountain temple along way off, and as if the labor required to
import it must have cost a lot of money.” Ifthe owner of the house had put
this much effort into one gate, it would show in his tea ceremony-—-and indeed Sen no Rikyu had to leave the ceremony early, unable to endure the
affectation and effort it inadvertently revealed.
On another evening, while having tea at a friend’s house, Rikyu saw
his host go outside, hold up a lantem in the darkness, cut a lemon off a tree,
and bring it in. This charmed Rikyu--the host needed a. relish for the dish
he was serving, and had spontaneously gone outside to get one. But when
the man offered the lemon with some Osaka rice cake, Rikyu realized that
he had planned the cutting of the lemon all along, to go with this expensive
delicacy. The gesture no longer seemed spontane0us—~it was a way for the
host to prove his cleverness. He had accidentally revealed how hard he
was trying. Having seen enough, Rikyu politely declined the cake, excused
himself, and left.
Emperor Hideyoshi once planned to visit Rikyu for a. tea ceremony.
On the night before he was to come, snow began to fall. Thinking quickly,
Rikyu laid round cushions that fit exactly on each of the steppingvstones
that led through the garden to his house. Just before dawn, he rose, saw
that it had stopped snowing, and carefully removed the cushions. When
Hideyoshi arrived, he marveled at the simple beauty of the sight-—tl1e perfectly round stepping stones, unencumbered by snow——-and noticed how it
called no attention to the manner in which Rikyu had accomplished it, but
only to the polite gesture itself.
After Sen no Rikyu died, his ideas had a profound influence on the
practice of the tea ceremony. The Tokugawa shogun Yorinobu, son of the
great Emperor Ieyasu, was a student of Rikyu's teachings. In his garden he
had a stone lantern made by a famous master, and Lord Sakai Tadakatsu
asked ifhe could come by one day to see it. Yoriuobu replied that he would
be honored, and commanded his gardeners to put everything in order for
the visit. These gardeners, unfamiliar with the precepts of Cha-no~yu,
thought the stone lantern misshapen, its windows being too small for the
present taste. They had a local workman enlarge the windows. A few days
before Lord Sakai’s visit, Yorinobu toured the garden. ‘When he saw the al-
tered windows he exploded with rage, ready to impale on his sword the
fool who had mined the lantern, upsetting its natural grace and destroying
the whole purpose of Lord Sakafs visit.
When Yorinobu calmed down, however, he remembered that he had
originally bought two of the lanterns, and that the second was in his garden
on the island of Kishu. At great expense, he hired a whale boat and the
finest rowers he could find, ordering them to bring the lantern to him
within two days—a difficult feat at best, But the sailors rowed day and
night, and with the luck of a good wind they arrived just in time. To ‘[011-
nobu’s delight, this stone lantern was more magnificent than the first, for it
had stood untouched for twenty years in a bamboo thicket, acquiring 2-1
brilliant antique appearance and a delicate covering of moss. When Lord
Sakai arrived, later that same day, he was awed by the lantern, which was
more magnificent than he had imag1'ned———so graceful and at one with the
elements. Fortunately he had no idea what time and effort it had cost Yorinobu to create this sublime effect.
interpretation
To Sen no Rikyu, the sudden appearance of something naturally, almost
accidentally graceful was the height of beauty. This beauty came without
warning and seemed effortless. Nature created such things by its own laws
and processes, but men had to create their effects through labor and contrivance. And when they showed the effort of producing the effect, the e£
feet was spoiled. The gate came from too far away, the cutting ofthe lemon
looked contrived.
You will often have to use tricks and ingenuity to create your effects-—
the cushions in the snow, the men rowing all night——but your audience
must never suspect the work or the thinking that has gone into them. Nature does not reveal its tricks, and what imitates nature by appearing effortless approximates nature’s power.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW H
The great escape artist Harry Houdini once advertised his act as “The lm~
possible Possible." And indeed those who witnessed his dramatic escapes
felt that what he did onstage contradicted commonsense ideas of human
capacity.
One evening in 1904, an audience of 4,000 Londoners filled a theater
to watch Houdini accept a challenge: to escape from a. pair of manacles
billed as the strongest ever invented. They contained six sets of locks and
nine tumblers in each cuff; a Birmingham maker had spent five years constructing them. Experts who examined them said they had never seen anything so intricate, and this intricacy was thought to make them impossible
to escape.
The crowd watched the experts secure the manacles on Houdini’s
wrists. Then the escape artist entered a black cabinet on stage. The minutes
swallows over willow
trees. When Mrimmum-,
saw the fimshed work
he was as m-*erjr>y(’(I at
the artist‘: skill ar Ire
had previously been
annoyed at the (eppun
em mess he was
making of the .s'crm:n.r.
CHA—Nc-Yu:
l‘il1‘JAPANLSl"l"l’A
CEREMUN
'
A. L. S.-\I)l.l£H. 1962
'|Ill‘. \\ Ill >4l‘l,l.‘£(.
'~1~\!é'i'l:R
Tlzere was once at
wrestling rmzsler who
was vmwd in 360 feirlts
and holds. Hr‘. look A
.s'peL‘iaI liking to one of
his pupils, In whom hr:
mug/ll 359 ofthem over
(2 periml 1,»/"time. Somehow he nevergm
armmd to the Ins! triclc.
As mrmtfn’ went by Ilut
young man Iiecalw so
profirmrtt in the all that
he beyletl everyone who
zlumd In fare him in I121!
ring. He was so proud
vfhir prowess that one
sin): hr buaszerl before
tire suliszlz that he czmlri
readily whip his rnaszer,
were it not our of
rn.s']7t'(‘t for his age am!
gratitllzle fur his
tutelage.
The sultan became
iI1€{’P1.S'(‘(.ftIl this irrcven
sure and ordered an
immediate: mezlch with
the royal czmrt in
urtendmzce.
/1! the gang Illa youth
lmrged forward with :1
lusty yell. only to be
confront;-,d with the
unfamiliar 3510111 )‘t*1'nI.
The masler seized his
former pupil, lifted him
high above his head,
Imdflung him crashing
m the ground. The
sultan and the Insembly let out a loud cheer.
When the rultun asked
the masier how hr: was
able to overcome rack
11 strong opponent, fhe
rnmter corifcxsed that
he had reserved a secret
technique for himseif
forjllsl such 11 crmlirtr
gem-y. Then he related
the Iamemulion of a
marlcr of archery, who
laugh: everything he
knew. "No one has
Ierzrnm! archery from
me,
"
the poor fellow
cornphiined, “who has
rint men‘ to use me as :2
buff in the end. "
A srour or S/mm.
AS TOLD 1N
ms CRAI-“I or POW!-;R.
R.G. H. 511:, 1979
248 .
LAW 30
went by; the more time passed, the more certain it seemed that these man»
acles would be the first to defeat him. At one point he emerged from the
cabinet, and asked that the cuffs be temporarily removed so that he could
take off his coat—it was hot inside. The challengers refused, suspecting his
request was a trick to find out how the locks worked. Undeterred, and with
out using his hands, Houdini managed to lift the coat over his shoulders,
turn it inside out, remove a penknife from his vest pocket with his teeth,
and, by moving his head, out the coat off his arms. Freed from the coat, he
stepped back into the cabinet, the audience roaring with approval at his
grace and dexterity.
Finally, having kept the audience wailing long enough, Houdini
emerged from the cabinet a second time, now with his hands free, the manacles raised high in triumph. To this day no one knows how he managed
the escape. Although he had taken close to an hour to free himself, he had
never looked concerned, had shown no sign of doubt. Indeed it seemed by
the end that he had drawn out the escape as a way to heighten the drama,
to make the audience worry-—-for there was no other sign that the perfon
mance had been anything but easy. The complaint about the heat was
equally part of the act. The spectators of this and other Houdini perfon
mances must have felt he was toying with them: These manacles are noth~
ing, he seemed to say, I could have freed myself a lot sooner, and from a
lot worse.
Over the years, Houdini escaped from the chained carcass of an em
balmed “sea monster” (3. half octopus, half whalelike beast that had
beached near Boston); he had himself sealed inside an enormous envelope
from which he emerged without breaking the paper; he passed through
brick walls; he wriggled free from straitjackets while dangling high in the
air; he leaped from bridges into icy waters, his hands manacled and his legs
in chains; he had himself submerged in glass cases full of water, hands padlocked, while the audience watched in amazement as he worked himself
free, struggling for close to an hour apparently without breathing. Each
time he seemed to court certain death yet survived with superhuman
aplomb. Meanwhile, he said nothing about his methods, gave no clues as
to how be accomplished any of his tricks——~he left his audiences and critics
speculating, his power and reputation enhanced by their struggles with the
inexplicable. Perhaps the most baffling trick of all was making a ten—thousa.ud—pound elephant disappear before an audience’s eyes, a feat he re
peated on stage for over nineteen weeks. No one has ever really explained
how he did this, for in the auditorium where he performed the trick, there
was simply nowhere for an elephant to hide.
The effortlessness of Houdin1"s escapes led some to think he used occult forces, his superior psychic abilities giving him special control over his
body. But a German escape artist named Kleppini claimed to know Hon»
dini’s secret: He simply used elaborate gadgets. Kleppini also claimed to
have defeated Houdini in a handcuff challenge in Holland.
Houdini did not mind all kinds of speculation floating around about
his methods, but he would not tolerate an outright lie, and in 1902 he challenged Kleppini to a handcuff duel. Kleppini accepted. Through a
spy, he
found out the secret word to unlock a pair of French combination-lock
cuffs that Houdini liked to use. His plan was to choose these cuffs to escape
from onstage. This would definitively debunk Houdini—his “genius” simply lay in his use of mechanical gadgets.
On the night of the challenge, just as Kleppini had planned, Houdini
offered him a choice of cuffs and he selected the ones with the combination
lock. He was even able to disappear with them behind a screen to make a
quick test, and reemerged seconds later, confident of victory.
Acting as if he sensed fraud, Houdini refused to lock Kleppini in the
cuffs. The two men argued and began to fight, even wrestling with each
other onstage. After a few minutes of this, an apparently angry, frustrated
Houdini gave up and locked Kleppini in the cuffs. For the next few minutes
Kleppini strained to get free. Something was wrong——minutes earlier he
had opened the cuffs behind the screen; now the same code no longer
worked. He sweated, racking his brains. Hours went by, the audience left,
and finally an exhausted and humiliated Kleppini gave up and asked to be
released.
The cuffs that Kleppini himself had opened behind the screen with the
word “C—L—E-F—S” (French for “keys”) now clicked open only with the
word “F-R-A-U-D. ”Kleppini never figured out how Houdini had accomplished this uncanny feat.
Interpretation
Although we do not know for certain how Houdini accomplished many of
his most ingenious escapes, one thing is clear: It was not the occult, or any
kind of magic, that gave him his powers, but hard work and endless practice, all of which he carefully concealed from the world. Houdini never left
anything to chance-—-day and night he studied the workings of locks, researched centuries-old sleight—of-hand tricks, pored over books on mechan
ics, whatever he could use. Every moment not spent researching he spent
working his body, keeping himself exceptionally limher, and learning how
to control his muscles and his breathing.
Early on in Houdini’s career, an old Japanese performer whom he
toured with taught him an ancient trick: how to swallow an ivory ball, then
bring it back up. He practiced this endlessly with a small peeled potato tied
to a string—up and down he would manipulate the potato with his throat
muscles, until they were strong enough to move it without the string. The
organizers of the London handcuff challenge had searched Houdini’s body
thoroughly beforehand, but no one could check the inside of his throat,
where he could have concealed small tools to help him escape. Even so,
Kleppini was fundamentally wrong: It was not Houdini’s tools but his practice, work, and research that made his escapes possible.
Kleppini, in fact, was completely outwitted by Houdini, who set the
whole thing up. He let his opponent learn the code to the French cuffs,
Keep the exrent nfyour
abilities unknown. The
wise man does not
allow hIS knowledge
and abilities to be
rounded to the bottom,
ifhe desires to be
honored by all. He
allows you to know
them but 710! to
comprehend them. No
one must know the
extent of/zit abilities
lest he be disappointed.
No one ever has an
opportunity offazhmw
ing him entirely. Fur
guesses and doubts
about the extem ofhis
taletus arouse more
veneration than accu—
rule knowledge of
them, be they ever so
great.
BALTASAR GRACIAN,
1601-1658
LAW 30 249
250 . LAW 30
then baited him into choosing those cuffs onstage. Then, during the two
men’s tussle, the dexterous Houdini was able to change the code to “ERAvU-D.” He had spent weeks practicing this trick, but the audience saw
none of the sweat and toil behind the scenes. Nor was Houdini ever nervous; he induced nervousness in others. (He deliberately dragged out the
time it would take to escape, as a way of heightening the drama, and making the audience squirm.) His escapes from death, always graceful and
easy, made him look like a
superman.
As a
person ofpower, you must research and practice endlessly before
appearing in public, onstage or anywhere else. Never expose the sweat and
labor behind your poise. Some think such exposure will demonstrate their
diligence and honesty, but it actually just makes them look weaker-—as if
anyone who practiced and worked at it could do what they had done, or as
if they weren’t really up to the job. Keep your effort and your tricks to
yourself and you seem to have the grace and ease of a. god. One never sees
the source of a god’s power revealed; one only sees its effects.
A line [ofpoetry] will take us hours maybe;
Yet ifit does not seem a mmnentis thought,
Our stitching and unstitciting has been naught.
Adam ‘s Curse, William Butler them, I865~~l' 939
KEYS TO POWER
Humanity‘s first notions ofpower came from primitive encounters with nature-—the flash of lightning in the sky, a sudden flood, the speed and feroc
ity of a wild animal. These forces required no thinking, no planning—they
awed us by their sudden appearance, their gracefulness, and their power
over life and death. And this remains the kind of power we have always
wanted to imitate. Through science and technology we have recreated the
speed and sublime power of nature, but something is missing: Our ma~
chines are noisy and jerky, they reveal their effort. Even the very best creations of technology cannot root out our admiration for things that move
easily and effortlessly. The power of children to bend us to their will comes
from a kind of seductive charm that we feel in the presence‘ of a creature
less reflective and more graceful than we are. We cannot retum to such a
state, but if we can create the appearance of this kind of ease, we elicit in
others the kind of primitive awe that nature has always evoked in humankind.
One of the first European writers to expound on this principle came
from that most unnatural of environments, the Renaissance court. In 771:
Book ofthe Courtier, published in 1528, Baldassare Castiglione describes the
highly elaborate and codified manners of the perfect court citizen. And yet,
Castiglione explains, the courtier must execute these gestures with what he
calls .r[mzz,zatu1a, the capacity to make the difficult seem easy. He urges the
courtier to “practice in all things a certain nonchalance which conceals all
artistry and makes whatever one says or does seem uncontrived and effortless.” We all admire the achievement of some unusual feat, but if it is accomplished naturally and gracefully, our admiration increases tenfold-—
“whereas . . . to labor at what one is doing and . . . to make bones over it,
shows an extreme lack of grace and causes everything, whatever its worth,
to be discounted.”
Much of the idea of sprezzalura came from the world of art. All the
great Renaissance artists carefully kept their works under wraps. Only the
finished masterpiece could be shown to the public. Michelangelo forbade
even popes to view his work in process. A Renaissance artist was always
careful to keep his studios shut to patrons and public alike, not out of fear
of imitation, but because to see the making of the works would mar the
magic of their effect, and their studied atmosphere of ease and natural
beauty.
The Renaissance painter Vasari, also the first great art critic, ridiculed
the work of Paolo Uccello, who was obsessed with the laws of perspective.
The elfort Uccello spent on improving the appearance of perspective was
too obvious in his work——it made his paintings ugly and labored, overwhelmed by the elicit of their effects. We have the same response when we
watch performers who put too much effort into their act: Seeing them trying so hard breaks the illusion. It also makes us uncomfortable. Calm,
graceful performers, on the other hand, set us at ease, creating the illusion
that they are not acting but being natural and themselves, even when
everything they are doing involves labor and practice.
The idea of sprewztum is relevant to all forms of power, for power
depends vitally on appearances and the illusions you create. Your public
actions are like artworks: They must have visual appeal, must create antici»
pation, even entertain. When you reveal the inner workings of your cre—
ation, you become just one more mortal among others. What is
understandable is not awe-inspiring-—we tell ourselves we could do as well
if we had the money and time. Avoid the temptation of showing how
clever you are-—it is far more clever to conceal the mechanisms of your
cleverness.
Talleyrand’s application of this concept to his daily life greatly en»
hanced the aura ofpower that surrounded him. He never liked to work too
hard, so he made others do the work for hirn—-the spying, the research, the
detailed analyses. With all this labor at his disposal, he himself never
seemed to strain. VVhen his spies revealed that a certain event was about to
take place, he would talk in social conversation as if he sensed its imminence. The result was that people thought he was clairvoyant. His short
pithy statements and witticisms always seemed to summarize a situation
perfectly, but they were based on much research and thought. '13:: those in
government, including Napoleon himself, Talleyrand gave the impression
of immense power—an effect entirely dependent on the apparent ease
with which he accomplished his feats.
There is another reason for concealing your shortcuts and tricks:
LAW 30 251
When you let this information out, you give people ideas they can use
against you. You lose the advantages of keeping silent. We tend to want the
world to know what we have done--we want our vanity gratified by hay»
ing our hard work and cleverness applauded, and we may even want sym—
pathy for the hours it has taken to reach our point of artistry. Learn to
control this propensity to blab, for its effect is often the opposite of what
you expected. Remember: The more mystery surrounds your actions, the
more awesome your power seems, You appear to be the only one who can
do what you do--and the appearance of having an exclusive is immensely powerful. Finally, because you achieve your accomplishments
with grace and ease, people believe that you could always do more if you
tried harder. This elicits not only admiration but a touch of fear. Your powers are untapped-——no one can fathom their limits.
Image: The Racehorse. From up close we would see the
strain, the effort to control the horse, the labored, painful
breathing. But from the distance where we sit and watch, it
is all gracefulness, flying through the air. Keep others at a
distance and they will only see the ease with which you move.
Authority: For whatever action [nonchalance] accompanies, no
matter how trivial it is, it not only reveals the skill of the person
doing it but also very often causes it to be considered far greater
than it really is. This is because it makes the onlookers believe that
a man who performs well with so much faxsility must possess even
greater skill than he does. (Baldassare Castiglione, 14784529)
REVERSAL
The secrecy with which you surround your azztions must seem lighthearted
in spirit. A zeal to conceal your work creates an unpleasant, almost paranoiar: impression: you are taking the game too seriously. Houdini was care»
ful to make the concealment of his tricks seem a
game, all part of the show.
Never show your work until it is finished, but if you put too much effort
into keeping it under wraps you will be like the painter Pontormo, who
spent the last years of his life hiding his frescoes from the public eye and
only succeeded in driving himself mad. Always keep your sense of humor
about yourself.
There are also times when revealing the inner workings of your pm
jects can prove worthwhile. It all depends on your andience’s taste, and on
252 — LAW 30
the times in which you operate. P. T. Barnum recognized that his public
wanted to feel involved in his shows, and that understanding his tricks delighted them, partly, perhaps, because implicitly debunking people who
kept their sources of power hidden from the masses appealed to Ametica’s
democratic spirit. The public also appreciated the showman’s humor and
honesty. Barnum took this to the extreme of publicizing his own humbug—
gery in his popular autobiogzaphy, written when his career was at its
height.
As long as the partial disclosure of tricks and techniques is carefully
planned, rather than the result of an uncontrollable need to blab, it is the
ultimate in cleverness. It gives the audience the illusion of being superior
and involved, even while much of what you do remains concealed from
them.
LAW 30 1 253
31
CONTROLTHEOFUON&
(3ET(3TT{EIHSTC)PIJVYVVYFH
TEH£CDkRJ)S‘YCHJI)EHXL
JUDGMENT
The best deeeptirms are the ones that seem to give the
other person a choice: Your victims feel they are in control, but are actually your puppets. Give people options
that come out in yourfavor whichever one they choose.
Force them to make choices between the lesser of two evils,
both of which serve yourpurpose. Put them an the horns
ofa dilemma: They me gmed wherever they turn.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW I
From early in his reign, Ivan IV, later known as Ivan the Terrible, had to
confront an unpleasant reality: The country desperately needed reform,
but he lacked the power to push it through. The greatest limit to his authority Came from the boyars, the Russian princely class that dominated the
country and terrorized the peasantry.
In 1553, at the age of twenty-three, Ivan fell ill. Lying in bed, nearing
death, he asked the boyars to swear allegiance to his son as the new czar.
Some hesitated, some even refused. Then and there Ivan saw he had no
power over the boyars. He recovered from his illness, but he never forgot
the lesson: The boyars were out to destroy him. And indeed in the years to
come, many of the most powerful of them defected to Russia’s main enemies, Poland and Lithuania, where they plotted their return and the overthrow of the czar. Even one of Ivan’s closest friends, Prince Andrey
Kurbski, suddenly turned against him, defecting to Lithuania in 1564, and
becoming the strongest of Iva.n’s enemies.
When Kurbski began raising troops for an invasion, the royal dynasty
seemed suddenly more precarious than ever. With émigré nobles fomenting invasion from the west, Tartars bearing down from the east, and the bcr
yars stirring up trouble within the country, Russia’s vast size made it a
nightmare to defend. In whatever direction Ivan struck, he would leave
himself vulnerable on the other side. Only if he had absolute power could
he deal with this many-headed Hydra. And he had no such power.
Ivan brooded until the morning of December 3, 1564, when the citizens of Moscow awoke to a
strange sight. Hundreds of sleds filled the
square before the Kremlin, loaded with the cza.r’s treasures and with provisions for the entire court. They watched in disbelief as the czar and his
court boarded the sleds and left town. Without explaining why, he established himself in a
village south of Moscow. For an entire month a kind of
terror gripped the capital, for the Muscovites feared that Ivan had abandoned them to the bloodthirsty boyars. Shops closed up and riotous mobs
gathered daily. Finally, on January 3 of 1565, a. letter arrived from the czar,
explaining that he could no longer bear the boyars’ betrayals and had do
cided to abdicate once and for all.
Read aloud in public, the letter had a startling effect: Merchants and
commoners blamed the boyars for Ivan’s decision, and took to the streets,
terrifying the nobility with their fury. Soon a
group of delegates representing the church, the princes, and the people made the journey to Ivan’s village, and begged the czar, in the name of the holy land of Russia, to return
to the throne. Ivan listened but would not change his mind. After days of
hearing their pleas, however, he offered his subjects a choice: Either they
grant him absolute powers to govern as he pleased, with no interference
from the boyars, or they find a new leader.
Faced with a choice between civil war and the acceptance of despotic
power, almost every sector of Russian society “opted” for a strong czar,
calling for Ivan’s return to Moscow and the restoration of law and order. In
The German Cl’UlN(.'£’l'
lur Bl.!VilClI‘(7l(, ermzged
at the romlmtr criti-
(,‘l.\‘fl1S’/lftllll Rudolf
Virclww (the Ger/mm
puth(7l0gi.rl tlllll llbrrul
politirmn),I1ad his
.swoml.s' call upon the
.\’Cl£’IlIiSl I0 L"1(llll’7lg(’
/rim to a duel. “As the
CIlIllll“.Vlg(’(l party. Ilmvv
the clmiw of weapons,
"
will Vimlzow. "and I
choose lhvre."Hehcl1l
ulaft (W0 large’ and
appammly irlrnrlcal
xauxu,-.;c.r. “One of
tlte.w,” he went on, “ix
!IIfI,'Ct¢’,(l Will‘! (ll-‘arlly
gcrrns: the other is
per;/early sound. Le!
Ilix E.\‘(‘ellenL'y zlericle
w/rich, om‘ he wi.s'l1e.v to
wt. and I Will real the
other. “
/l lmmt immediately I/zc ll|L'J.Yll;,’L’ czmm
back (ha! the chancellor had (l[‘('l(l£‘d to
rzmcrl the duel.
rue 1.111 LE, BROWN
BOOK OF .r\,Ni-(‘Dori-.s,
CLIFION F/\l)lM/\N, E13,.
1985
LAW 3! 255
'|‘lIli LIAN
Once upon 41 time there
was a king of/lrnvertia,
who. being oft: lruriuus
mm nfmind and in
need a,f's(>nw new
aliversion, sent his
heralllx tk9’()l.lg}‘IA’)llI the
land to make
the following
/zm::lamnii'mz:
“Hear this! Whatever
man anmng you ('10!
prove himselfthe most
outrageous liar in
Armenia shall rei-eivr
an apple‘ made ofpurc
gold from the hands of
His .Ma;'€s!y the King!”
People began to swarrn
70 file palace from
every town and hamlrt
in the country, people
o/‘all ranks and
conditions, princux,
merclilinis, farmers‘.
priests, rich and poor,
(all and short, fat and
thin. There was no lack
of liars in the land, and
each one mid his Iale to
the king. /1 ruler,
however, has heard
practically every sort of
lie, and none ofthoxe
now mid him
convinced the king that
he had Iisrerxed to the
hm of them.
The king was begirr
ning to grow tired of
his new sport and was
thinking ofmlling the
whole contest off with
out declaring a winner,
when there appeamd
before him :2 poor,
ragged man, carrying :1
large earthenware
pitcher under his arm.
“Who! can I do for
vim?" asked llis
Majesty.
“Sire;”'s~a§d the poor
man, slightly bewil256 LAW 31
February, with much celebration, Ivan returned to Moscow. The Russians
could no longer complain if he behaved dictatorially-—-they had given him
this power themselves.
Interpretation
Ivan the Tenible faced a terrible dilemma: To give in to the boyars would
lead to certain destruction, but civil war would bring a different kind of
ruin. Even ifIvan came out of such a. war on top, the counhy would be devastated and its divisions would be stronger than ever. His weapon of choice
in the past had been to make a bold, offensive move. Now, however, that
kind of move would turn against him—the more boldly be confronted his
enemies, the worse the reactions he would spark.
The main weakness of a show of force is that it stirs up resentment and
eventually leads to a
response that eats at your authofity. Ivan, immensely
creative in the use of power, saw clearly that the only path to the kind of
victory he wanted was a false withdrawal. He would not force the country
over to his position, he would give it “options”: either his abdication, and
certain anarchy, or his accession to absolute power. To back up his move,
he made it clear that he preferred to abdicate: “Call my bluffi” he said,
“and watch what happens.” No one called his bluff. By withdrawing forjust
a month, he showed the country a glimpse of the nightmares that would
follow his abdication-—Taxtar invasions, civil war, ruin. (All of these did
eventually come to pass after Ivan’s death, in the infamous “Time of the
Troubles”)
Withdrawal and disappearance are classic ways of controlling the op»
tions. You give people a sense ofhow things will fall apart without you, and
you offer them a “choice”: I
stay away and you suffer the consequences, or
I retum under circumstances that I dictate. In this method of controlling
people’s options, they choose the option that gives you power because the
alternative is just too unpleasant. You force their hand, but indirectly: They
seem to have a choice. Whenever people feel they have a choice, they walk
into your trap that much more easily.
OBSELRVANCE OF THE LAW II
As a
seventeenth-century French courtesan, Ninon de Lenclos found that
her life had certain pleasures. Her lovers came from royalty and aristocracy, and they paid her well, entertained her with their wit and intellect,
satisfied her rather demanding sensual needs, and treated her almost as an
equal. Such a life was infinitely preferable to marriage. In 1643, however,
Ninon’s mother died suddenly, leaving her, at the age of twenty-three, to
tally alone in the world-«no family, no dowry, nothing to fallback upon. A
kind ofpanic overtook her and she entered a convent, tuming her back on
her illustrious lovers. A year later she left the convent and moved to Lyons.
When she finally reappeared in Paris, in 1648, lovers and suitors flocked to
her door in greater numbers than ever before, for she was the wittiest and
most spirited courtesan of the time and her presence had been greatly
missed.
Ninon’s followers quickly discovered, however, that she had changed
her old way of doing things, and had set up a new system of options. The
dukes, seigneurs, and princes who wanted to pay for her services could
continue to do so, but they were no longer in control-—she would sleep
with them when she wanted, according to her whim. All their money
bought them was a possibility. Ifit was her pleasure to sleep with them only
once a month, so be it.
Those who did not want to be what Ninon called a payeur could join
the large and growing group of men she called her martyrs--men who vis—
ited her apartment principally for her friendship, her biting wit, her luteplaying, and the company of the most vibrant minds of the period,
including Moliere, La Rochefoucauld, and Saint~Evremond. The martyrs,
too, however, entertained a possibility: She would regularly select from
them a
fiwori, a man who would become her lover without having to pay,
and to whom she would abandon herself completely for as long as she so
desired-—«a week, a few months, rarely longer. Apayeur could not become a
favori, but a martyr had no guarantee of becoming one, and indeed could
remain disappointed for an entire lifetime. The poet Charleval, for examv
pie, never enjoyed Ninon’s favors, but never stopped coming to visit--he
did not want to do without her company.
As word of this system reached polite French society, Ninon became
the object of intense hostility. Her reversal of the position of the courtesan
scandalized the queen mother and her court. Much to their horror, however, it did not discourage her male suitors—indeed it only increased their
numbers and intensified their desire, It became an honor to be a payeur,
helping Ninon to maintain her lifestyle and her glittering salon, accompanying her sometimes to the theater, and sleeping with her when she chose.
Even more distinguished were the martyrs, enjoying her company without
paying for it and maintaining the hope, however remote, of some day becoming her fizvorz‘. That possibility spurred on many a
young nobleman, as
word spread that none among the courtesans could surpass Ninon in the
art of love. And so the married and the single, the old and the young, entered her web and chose one of the two options presented to them, both of
which amply satisfied her.
Interpretation
The life of the courtesan entailed the possibility of a
power that was denied
a married woman, but it also had obvious perils. The man who paid for the
courtesaxfs services in essence owned her, determining when he could possess her and when, later on, he would abandon her. As she grew older, her
options narrowed, as fewer men chose her. To avoid a life of poverty she
had to amass her fortune while she was young. The courtesan’s legendary
greed, then, reflected a practical necessity, yet also lessened her allure,
since the illusion ofbeing desired is important to men, who are often aliendcrcd. "Surely you
reiziember? You owe
me :1 pm o}"gr>Id. and I
have come In
collect it. "
“You are a perferr liar,
sir/" exclaimed the
king. “I owe you no
money! "
“A perfect liar, um I? ”
said the poor man.
“Than give me the
golden appl::.’"
The king. realizing that
the man was trying to
Nick him. started to
hedge
“No, no.’ Yz>u are no! bi
Har!”
“Then gwc me the pot
ofgmld you owe me,
sire "said the man.
The king .\'(lW the
dilemma. He handed
over the golden apple.
Amtesznxn FOLK-TALES
AND i~ABi.es,
Rrvrou) BY
CH/\Rl,ES Dowmszo.
1993
LAW 3} $15
.l. R Morgan St». once
((1111ajcwzzlmuflhis
an/uairzm:m> that he
was imererrerl Ill
buying a pearl .\'( ml’-
pin. Just a
few wt?€k.s
1zlIt'r'. the ;eweIer
happened upon a
rmzgrtzficerzt pearl’. [[9
had i! mmmfed in an
uppmprmte sertizzg and
SM! is’ 10 Morgan.
mgrtlser with (2 billfor
$5,001). ‘lhefollriwing
day the parka/gr: wax
rem mud. Morgan ix‘
acrcmrtpzt/tying note
read: “I like the pm.
but I (hm ’t like 1111»
prire. [fyma will uccepi
the enclasezl ciwrzk for
$¢\()()0. pleaxv send
back the box with the
sear.’ smbmkcn. "
The
mrrzgerl jcwelrer refzmui
the dizrrk and diy»
rriissezl the i?i€.\‘S€Ilg€I'
in 1li.Ygll5‘l. Ht! nprsmui
up the box to reclaim
the mmwxml pm, only
to /iml that u hm! L-cm
rrmzovorli In in plum’
mm a
(1u'(,'kfor .h”5,(}(l().
'1 H]; H rruz, uiwwr»
li()<)l\‘ or AN!,('DO’H 54
L'i,u"mr~ I-‘m>|M.»\i~:, I-n..
l985
258 LAW 31
ated if their partner is too interested in their money. As the courtesan aged,
then, she faced a most difficult fate.
Ninon de Lenclos had a horror of any kind of dependence. She early
on tasted a kind of equality with her lovers, and she would not settle into a
system that left her such distasteful options. Strangely enough, the system
she devised in its place seemed to satisfy her suitors as much as it did her.
The payeur: may have had to pay, but the fact that Ninon would only sleep
with them when she wanted to gave them a thrill unavailable with every
other courtesan: She was yielding out of her own desire. The martyrs’
avoidance of the taint ofhaving to pay gave them a sense of superiority; as
members of Ninon’s fraternity of admirers, they also might some day expe
rience the ultimate pleasure of being her favari. Finally, Ninon did not
force her suitors into either category. They could “choose” which side they
prefer:-ed—a freedom flint left them a vestige of masculine pride.
Such is the power of giving people a choice, or rather the illusion of
one, for they are playing with cards you have dealt them. Where the alternatives set up by Ivan the Terrible involved a certain risk—-one option
would have led to his losing his power——Ninon created a. situation in which
every option redounded to her favor. From the payeurs she received the
money she needed to run her salon. And from the martyrs she gained the
ultimate in power: She could surround herself with a. bevy of admirers, a
harem from which to choose her lovers.
The system, though, depended on one critical factor: the possibility,
however remote, that a martyr could become a
fawn". The illusion that
riches, glory, or sensual satisfaction may someday fall into your victim's lap
is an irresistible carrot to include in your list of choices. That hope, however slim, will make men accept the most ridiculous situations, because it
leaves them the allimportant option of a dream. The illusion of choice,
married to the possibility of future good fortune, will lure the most stub
born sucker into your glittering web.
KEYS TO POWER
Words like “freedom,” “options,” and “choice” evoke a
power of possibility
far beyond the reality of the benefits they entail. When examined closely,
the choices we have——in the marketplace, in elections, in ourjobs»-tend to
have noticeable limitations: They are often a matter of a choice simply between A and B, with the rest of the alphabet out of the picture. Yet as long
as the faintest mirage of choice flickers on, we rarely focus on the missing
options. We “choose” to believe that the game is fair, and that we have our
freedom. We prefer not to think too much about the depth of our liberty to
choose.
This unwillingness to probe the smallness of our choices stems from
the fact that too much freedom creates a kind of amdety. The phrase “unlimited options” sounds infinitely promising, but unlimited options would
actually paralyze us and cloud our ability to choose. Our limited range of
choices comforts us.
This supplies the clever and cunning with enormous opportunities for
deception. For people who are choosing between alternatives find it hard
to believe they are being manipulated or deceived; they cannot see that
you are allowing them a small amount of free will in exchange for a much
more powerful imposition of your own will. Setting up a narrow range of
choices, then, should always be a part of your deceptions. There is a saying: If you can get the bird to walk into the cage on its own, it will sing that
much more prettily.
The following are among the most common forms of “controlling the
options”:
Color the Choices. This was a favored technique of Henry Kissinger. As
President Richard Nixon’s secretary of state, Kissinger considered himself
better informed than his boss, and believed that in most situations he could
make the best decision on his own. But if he tried to determine policy, he
would offend or perhaps enrage a notoriously insecure man. So Kissinger
would propose three or four choices of action for each situation, and would
present them in such a way that the one he preferred always seemed the
best solution compared to the others. Time afler time, Nixon fell for the
bait, never suspecting that he was moving where Kissinger pushed him.
This is an excellent device to use on the insecure master.
Force the Resistor. One of the main problems faced by Dr. Milton H. Erickson, a pioneer of hypnosis therapy in the 1950s, was the relapse. His pa»
tients might seem to be recovering rapidly, but their apparent susceptibility
to the therapy masked a deep resistance: They would soon relapse into old
habits, blame the doctor, and stop coming to see him. To avoid this, Ericlo
son began ordering some patients to have a
relapse, to make themselves feel
as bad as when they first came in—-——to go back to square one. Faced with
this option, the patients would usually “choose” to avoid the relapsewhich, of course, was what Erickson really wanted.
This is a good technique to use on children and other willful people
who enjoy doing the opposite of what you ask them to: Push them to
“choose” what you want them to do by appearing to advocate the opposite.
Alter the Playing Field. In the 1860s,john D. Rockefeller set out to create an oil monopoly. If he tried to buy up the smaller oil companies they
would figure out what he was doing and fight back. Instead, he began secretly buying up the railway companies that transported the oil. When he
then attempted to take over a particular company, and met with resistance,
he reminded them of their dependence on the rails. Refusing them shipping, or simply raising their fees, could ruin their business. Rockefeller a.l~
tered the playing field so that the only options the small oil producers had
were the ones he gave them.
In this tactic your opponents know their hand is being forced, but it
doesn’t matter. The technique is effective against those who resist at all
costs.
LAW 31 259
2&0 LAW’ 31
The Shrinking Options. The latemineteenth-century art dealer Ambroise Vollard perfected this technique.
Customers would come to Volla.rd’s shop to see some Cézannes. He
would show three paintings, neglect to mention a price, and pretend to
doze off. The visitors would have to leave without deciding. They would
usually come back the next day to see the paintings again, but this time
Vollard would pull out less interesting works, pretending he thought they
were the same ones. The baffled customers would look at the new offerings, leave to think them over, and return yet again. Once again the same
thing would happen: Vollard would show paintings of lesser quality still. Finally the buyers would realize they had better grab what he was showing
them, because tomorrow they would have to settle for something worse,
perhaps at even higher prices.
A variation on this technique is to raise the price every time the buyer
hesitates and another day goes by. This is an excellent negotiating ploy to
use on the chronically indecisive, who will fall for the idea that they are getting a better deal today than if they wait till tomorrow.
The Weak Man on the Precipice. The weak are the easiest to maneuver
by controlling their options. Cardinal do Retz, the great seventeenth~century provocateur, served as an unofficial assistant to the Duke of Orléans,
who was notoriously indecisive. It was a constant struggle to convince the
duke to take action»-—-he would hem and haw, weigh the options, and wait
till the last moment, giving everyone around him an ulcer. But Retz discov~
ered a way to handle him: He would describe all sorts of dangers, exaggep
ating them as much as possible, until the duke saw a yawning abyss in
every direction except one: the one Retz was pushing him to take.
This tactic is similar to “Color the Choices,” but with the weak you
have to be more aggressive. Work on their emotions—use fear and terror
to propel them into action. Tn: reason and they will always find a way to
procrastinate.
Brothers in Crime. This is a classic convartist technique: You attract your
victims to some criminal scheme, creating a bond of blood and guilt between you. They participate in your deception, commit a crime (or think
they do-—-see the story of Sam Geezil in Law 3), and are easily manipulated. Serge Stavisky, the great French con artist of the 1920s, so entangled
the government in his scams and swindles that the state did not dare to
prosecute him, and “chose” to leave him alone. It is often wise to implicate
in your deceptions the very person who can do you the most harm if you
fail. Their involvement can be subtle—-even a hint of their involvement
will narrow their options and buy their silence.
The Horns of a Dilemma. This idea was demonstrated by General
William Sherma.n’s infamous march through Georgia during the American
Civil War. Although the Confederates knew what direction Sherman was
heading in, they never knew if he would attack from the left or the right, for
he divided his army into two wings--and if the rebels retreated from one
wing they found themselves facing the other. This is a classic trial lawyer’s
technique: The lawyer leads the witnesses to decide between two possible
explanations of an event, both of which poke a hole in their story. They
have to answer the lawyer’s questions, but whatever they say they hurt
themselves. The key to this move is to strike quickly: Deny the victim the
time to think of an escape. As they wriggle between the horns of the
dilemma, they dig their own grave.
Understand: In your struggles with your rivals, it will often be necessary
for you to hurt them. And if you are clearly the agent of their punishment,
expect a counterat1ack——expect revenge. If, however, they seem to themselaes to be the agents of their own misfortune, they will submit quietly.
When Ivan left Moscow for his rural village, the citizens asking him to return agreed to his demand for absolute power. Over the years to come,
they resented him less for the terror he unleashed on the country, because,
alter all, they had granted him his power themselves. This is why it is al
ways good to allow your victims their choice of poison, and to cloak your
involvement in providing it to them as far as possible.
Image: The Horns of
the Bull. The bull
backs you into the cor»
ner with its homs—~not
a single horn, which you
might be able to escape, but a pair of horns
that trap you within their
hold. Run right or run
lefl—either w a
y y
o u
move into their piercing
ends and are gored.
Authority: For the wounds and every other evil that men inllict upon themselves spontaneously, and of their own choice, are in the long run less
painful than those inflicted by others. (Niccolo Machiavelli, 140'9—~1527)
LAW 3] 261
5'62 LAW 31
REVERSAI.
Controlling the options has one main purpose: to disguise yourself as the
agent of power and punishment. The tactic works best, then, for those
whose power is fragile, and who cannot operate too openly without incurring suspicion, resentment, and anger. Even as a general rule, however, it is
rarely wise to be seen as exerting power directly and forcefully, no matter
how secure or strong you are. It is usually more elegant and more effective
to give people the illusion of choice.
On the other hand, by limiting other people’s options you sometimes
limit your own. There are situations in which it is to your advantage to
allow your rivals a
large degree of freedom: As you watch them operate,
you give yourself rich opportunities to spy, gather information, and plan
your deceptions. The nineteenth~century banker James Rothschild liked
this method: He felt that if he tried to control his opponents’ movements,
he lost the chance to observe their strategy and plan a more effective
course. The more freedom he allowed them in the short term, the more
forcefully he could act against them in the long run.
32
PLAY TO PEOPLES
FANTASIES
‘JUDGMENT
The truth ix often avoided because it is ugly and unpleasant. Never appeal to truth and reality unless you
are prepared for the anger that comex from disenchantment. Life is so harsh and distressing lhal people
who can manufacture mmemce oreonjme upfmitasy are
like oases in the desert: E1/eryoiwfloeks to them. There is
great pawer in tapping into thefantasies oftlze masses.
Tllli H Vi.“-\I. (ll-'
llllu l_lll'\|',*~‘1~'-
The lion having
smlelenly lost his
qU€t'.Vl. CVFVV (771?
Imstmred In Show allegirmcc to the monarch,
by offering con.voIation. These t:nmplimems, alas, served but
10 im‘re:a.s'c ihrt
widowraflx u}‘]iiL'Iion.
Due nrrlice was given
Ihmughour the lungrlom that ffze:fm:<:ru1‘
would be performed at
.2 certain time and
place; the lion 1: oflimrs
were ordered to be in
(1t!('Ild1ZI1(.‘(‘, to regulate
the ceremony, and
place the company
according to ll'l(’lV
res[7e(‘1lv(' rank.
One may well judge no
one abxenlerl himself."
The rmmarch go ve way
to his grief and the
wholv mvza lions haw
mg no mixer II3I31;')lt'.£’,
res'am1<led with Iris
cries: Afler his example,
all (he caurrins rrmrad
in their different zones.
A court is the son of
place where everyone is
either mrrowfal, gav,
vr mdi_fferem 10 everything. jun as the reigning prince may think
fir; or ifuny one is no!
ucmally, he at least trips
to appcarso: each
enlleavmx to rnimic the
muster. It 15 truly said
that one mmd mzimares
a lhoustmri bodies.
<Zlen'Il'l)J showing mm
human: beings
are mere marimrex
But for us rerun: to om
subject. The slag alone
shall no mars. How
could he, fursnuth? The
dmth of Ills‘ queen
avenged him, she had
264 LAW 32
OBSERVANCI:‘. OF THE LAW
The cityvstate ofVenice was prosperous for so long that its citizens felt their
small republic had destiny on its side. In the Middle Ages and High Re
naissance, its virtual monopoly on trade to the east made it the wealthiest
city in Europe. Under a beneficent republican government, Venelians enjoyed liberties that few other Italians had ever known. Yet in the sixteenth
century their fortunes suddenly changed, The opening of the New World
transferred power to the Atlantic side of Europewto the Spanish and Fortuguese, and later the Dutch and English. Venice could not compete eco
nomically and its empire gradually dwindled. The final blow was the
devastating loss of a prized Mediterranean possession, the island of
Cyprus, captured from Venice by the Turks in 1570.
Now noble families went broke in Venice, and banks began to fold. A
kind of gloom and depression settled over the citizens. They had known a
glittering past~—-had either lived through it or heard stories about it from
their elders. The closeness of the glory years was humiliating. The Vene—
clans half believed that the goddess Fortune was only playing a
joke on
them, and that the old days would soon return. For the time being, though,
what could they do?
In 1589 rumors began to swirl around Venice of the a.m‘val not far
away of a mysterious man called “ll Bragadino," a master of alchemy, a
man who had won incredible wealth through his ability, it was said, to multiply gold through the use of a secret substance. The rumor spread quickly
because a few years earlier, a Venetian nobleman passing through Poland
had heard a learned man prophesy that Venice would recover her past
glory and power if she could find a man who understood the alchemic art
of manufacturing gold. And so, as word reached Venice of the gold this
Bragadino possessed——he clinked gold coins continuously in his hands,
and golden objects filled his palace-some began to dream: Through him,
their city would prosper again.
Members of Venice’s most important noble families accordingly went
together to Brescia, where Bragadino lived. They toured his palace and
watched in awe as he demonstrated his gold-making abilities, taking a
pinch of seemingly worthless minerals and transforming it into several
ounces of gold dust. The Venetian senate prepared to debate the idea of ex
tending an ofllcial invitation to Bragadino to stay in Venice at the city’s expense, when word suddenly reached them that they were competing with
the Duke of Mantua for his services. They heard of a magnificent party in
Bragadinds palace for the duke, featuring garments with golden buttons,
gold watches, gold plates, and on and on. Worried they might lose Bragaclino (0 Martina, the senate voted almost unanimously to invite him to
Venice, promising him the mountain of money he would need to continue
living in his luxurious style-~but only if he came right away.
Late that year the mysterious Bragaclino arrived in Venice. With his
piercing dark eyes under thick brows, and the two enormous black mastiffs
that accompanied him everywhere, he was forbidding and impressive. He
took up residence in a
sumptuous palace on the island of the Giudecca,
with the republic funding his banquets, his expensive clothes, and all his
other whims. A kind of alchemy fever spread through Venice. On street
corners, hawkers would sell coal, distilling apparatus, bellows, how—to
books on the subject. Everyone began to practice alchemyw-everyone ex—
cept Bragadino.
The alchemist seemed to be in no hurry to begin manufacturing the
gold that would save Venice from ruin. Strangely enough this only increased his popularity and following; people thronged from all over Europe, even Asia, to meet this remarkable man. Months went by, with gifts
pouring in to Bragadino from all sides. Still he gave no sign of the miracle
that the Venetians confidently expected him to produce. Eventually the citizens began to grow impatient, wondering if he would wait forever. At first
the senators warned them not to hurry him-—-he was a capricious devil,
who needed to be cajoled. Finally, though, the nobility began to wonder
too, and the senate came under pressure to show a return on the city’s ba.l~
looning investment.
Bragadino had only scorn for the doubters, but he responded to them.
He had, he said, already deposited in the city’s mint the mysterious substance with which he multiplied gold. He could use this substance up all at
once, and produce double the gold, but the more slowly the process took
place, the more it would yield. If left alone for seven years, sealed in a cas
ket, the substance would multiply the gold in the mint thirty times over.
Most of the senators agreed to wait to reap the gold mine Bragadino
promised. Others, however, were angry: seven more years of this man living royally at the public trough! And many of the common citizens of
Venice echoed these sentiments. Finally the alchemist‘s enemies demanded
he produce a proof of his skills: a substantial amount ofgold, and soon.
Lofty, apparently devoted to his art, Bragadino responded that Venice,
in its impatience, had betrayed him, and would therefore lose his services.
He left town, going first to nearby Padua, then, in 1590, to Munich, at the
invitation of the Duke of Bavaria, who, like the entire city of Venice, had
known great wealth but had fallen into bankruptcy through his own profligacy, and hoped to regain his fortune through the famous alchemist’s services. And so Bragadino resumed the comfortable arrangement he had
known in Venice, and the same pattern repeated itself.
Interpretation
The young Cypriot Mamugna had lived in Venice for several years before
reincamating himself as the alchemist Bragadino. He saw how gloom had
settled on the city, how everyone was hoping for a
redemption from some
indefinite source. While other charlatans mastered everyday cons based on
sleight of hand, Mamugna mastered human nature. With Venice as his target from the start, he traveled abroad, made some money through his
alchemy scams, and then returned to Italy, setting up shop in Brescia.
There he created a
reputation that he knew would spread to Venice. From
a distance, in fact, his aura of power would be all the more impressive.
At first Mamugna did not use vulgar demonstrations to convince peoformerly strangled his
wife and son. A courtier
lhouglztfit In inform the
bereaved mormrch, and
even aflirnieri that he
had seen the stag laugh.
The rage oft: king, says
Solomon, is rerrible,
and especially that of
a
liomking. “I’itiful
fnr!',.rler.v"' he exclaimed,
"dares! thou laugh
when all around are
dissolved in (ears? We
will no! soil our royal
(laws will! Ihy profane
hlood.’ Do thou, brave
wulji avenge our queen,
by lmmola!ing1lii.s'
traitor [0 her august
mzmes.
"
Hercaupon the stag
rcpllred: "Sire. the mm»
for weeping is passed;
grief is here superflu-
(ms. Your revered
spouse appeared to me
but now. reparing on a
bed of roses; I
inslanzly
rzacognizcd her. ‘I-'n'erzd.‘
said she to me. ‘have
done with !lm‘funereal
pomp, cease these
useless‘ tears. I have
tasted rt Ihousaml
delights‘ in the E[V.VitIIl
fields, conwsm 5 with
rh(_:.s'e‘ who are suims like
myself 1,431 the kings
despair remain for
some time irrzcheckezl, iz
gratijlar me.
‘ "
Sr‘ar(‘e*ly
had he spoken, when
every one shouted: “A
miracle! a rmracle!"
The wing, instead of
being pimishea‘, received a lmnrlrome
D0 but entertain a king
with dre1m1s,flal1er
him. and tell him a few
pleasant fantastic lies:
wlmrewr Ills imIignatiun against you may
be. he will swallow the
bail, and make you his‘
dearesr friend.
l-}\lll.l‘S,
h=..et.\: on 1,». FONTAINE.
l62l»l(w‘)5
LAW 82 265
Ifymt want to tell lies
that will be helilaved,
dun’! tell the truth
that wont
EMPLROR TUKU19/\wA
lF\i;\Sl; or J/‘P/\Y\u
S1-‘.\'l-‘N TF1 N'I’ll (‘EN FURY
266 LAW 32
pic of his alchemic skill. His sumptuous palace, his opulent garments, the
clink of gold in his hands, all these provided a superior argument to anything rational. And these established the cycle that kept him going: His ob~
vious wealth confirmed his reputation as an alchemist, so that patrons like
the Duke of Mantua gave him money, which allowed him to live in wealth,
which reinforced his reputation as an alchemist, and so on. Only once this
reputation was established, and dukes and senators were fighting over him,
did he resort to the triflingnecessity of a demonstration. By then, however,
people were easy to deceive: They wanted to believe. The Venetian senators who watched him multiply gold wanted to believe so badly that they
failed to notice the glass pipe up his sleeve, from which he slipped gold
dust into his pinches of minerals. Brilliant and capricious, he was the al
chemist of their fantasies—-and once he had created an aura like this, no
one noticed his simple deceptions.
Such is the power of the fantasies that take root in us, especially in
times of scarcity and decline. People rarely believe that their problems
arise from their own misdeeds and stupidity. Someone or something out
there is to blame—-the other, the world, the gods—and so salvation comes
from the outside as well. Had Bragadino arrived in Venice armed with a
detailed analysis of the reasons behind the city’s economic decline, and of
the hardcnosed steps that it could take to turn things around, he would
have been scorned. The reality was too ugly and the solution too painful-—
mostly the kind of hard work that the citizens‘ ancestors had mustered to
create an empire. Fantasy, on the other hand——in this case the romance of
alchemy--was easy to understand and infinitely more palatable.
To gain power, you must be a source of pleasure for those around
you--and pleasure comes from playing to people’s fantasies. Never
promise a gradual improvement through hard work; rather, promise the
moon, the great and sudden transformation, the pot of gold.
No man need despair ofgainiug converts to the most extravagant
hypothesis who has an enough to represent it £1; favomable colors.
David Hium’, I 71.1-J 776
KEYS TO POWER
Fantasy can never operate alone. It requires the backdrop of the huxndrum
and the mundane. It is the oppressiveness ofreality that allows fantasy to
take root and bloom. In sixteenth-century Venice, the reality was one of de
clirre and loss of prestige. The corresponding fantasy described a sudden
recovery of past glories through the miracle of alchemy. While the reality
only got worse, the Venetians inhabited a happy dream world in which
their city restored its fabulous wealth and power overnight, turning dust
into gold.
The person who can spin a
fantasy out of an oppressive reality has access to untold power. As you search for the fantasy that will take hold of the
masses, then, keep your eye on the banal truths that weigh heavily on us
all. Never be distracted by peop1e’s glamorous portraits of themselves and
their lives; search and dig for what really imprisons them. Once you find
that, you have the magical key that will put great power in your hands.
Although times and people change, let us examine a few of the oppres~
sive realities that endure, and the opportunities for power they provide:
The Reality: Change isslow andgradual. It requires ham’ work, a bit ofluck, a
fair
amount ofrel —sacrg'fice, and a lot pfpatience.
The Fantasy: A sudden tmmfarmation will bring a total change in aneivfiirtunes,
bypassing work, luck, self-sacrifice, and time in onefantastic make.
This is of course the fantasy par excellence of the charlatans who
prowl among us to this day, and was the key to B1'agadin0’s success.
Promise a great and total change-—~from poor to rich, sickness to health,
misery to ecstasy—and you will have followers.
How did the great sixteenth-century German quack Leonhard
Thumeisser become the court physician for the Elector of Brandenburg
without ever studying medicine? Instead of offering amputations, leeches,
and foul~tasting purgatives (the medicaments of the time), Thurneisser ofv
fared sweevtasting elixirs and promised instant recovery. Fashionable
courtiers especially wanted his solution of “drinkable gold,” which cost a
fortune. If some inexplicable illness assailed you, Thur-neisser would consult a horoscope and prescribe a talisman. Who could resist such a
fantasy-—-health and well-being without sacrifice and pain!
The Reality: The social realm has lzard~set codes and boundaries. We understand
time limits and know that we have to move within the samefamiliar circles, ziay in
and ritzy out.
Tim Fantagv.“ WE’ can enter :1 totally new world with a':fi"m'ent codes and ihepmmzke
ofadventure.
In the early 1700s, all London was abuzz with talk of a mysterious
stranger, a
young man named George Psalmanazar. He had arrived from
what was to most Englishmen a fantastical land: the island of Formosa
(now Taiwan), off the coast of China. Oxford University engaged
Psalmauazar to teach the island’s language; a few years later he translated
the Bible into Formosan, then wrote a bool<—ar: immediate bestseller--on
Formosa’s history and geography. English royalty wined and dined the
young man, and everywhere he went he entertained his hosts with wondrous stories of his homeland, and its bizarre customs.
After Psalmanazar died, however, his will revealed that he was in fact
merely a Frenchman with a rich imagination. Everything he had said about
Formosa——-its alphabet, its language, its literature, its entire culture-—he had
invented. He had built on the English puhlic’s ignorance of the place to
concoct an elaborate story that fulfilled their desire for the exotic and
LAW 32 ‘.767
268 LAW 32
strange. British cultu.re’s rigid control of people’s dangerous dreams gave
him the perfect opportunity to exploit their fantasy.
I
The fantasy of the exotic, of course, can also skirt the sexual. It must
not come too close, though, for tl1e physical hinders the power of fantasy; it
can be seen, grasped, and then tired of-—the fate of most courtesans. The
bodily charms of the mistress only whet the master’s appetite for more and
different pleasures, a new beauty to adore. To bring power, fantasy must re»
main to some degree unrealized, literally unreal. The dancer Mata Hari,
for instance, who rose to public prominence in Paris before World War I,
had quite ordinary looks. Her power came from the fantasy she created of
being strange ‘and exotic, unknowable and indecipherable. The taboo she
worked with was less sex itself than the breaking of social codes.
Another form of the fantasy of the exotic is simply the hope for relief
from boredom. Con artists love to play on the oppressiveness of the working world, its lack of adventure. Their cons might involve, say, the recovery of lost Spanish treasure, with the possible participation of an alluring
Mexican sefiorita. and a connection to the president of a South American
country—a.nything oficering release from the humdrum.
The Reality: Society isfragmented andfull ofconflict.
The Fantasy: People can come together in a mystical union ofsouls.
In the 19205 the con man Oscar Hartzell made a quick fortune out of
the agevold Sir Francis Drake swindle—basically promising any sucker who
happened to be surnamed “Drake” a substantial share of the long-lost
“Drake treasure,” to which Hartzell had access. Thousands across the Midwest fell for the scam, which Hartzell cleverly turned into a crusade against
the government and everyone else who was trying to keep the Drake for»
tune out of the rightful hands of its heirs. There developed a mystical union
of the oppressed Drakes, with emotional rallies and meetings. Promise such
a union and you can gain much power, but it is a dangerous power that can
easily turn against you. This is a
fantasy for demagogues to play on.
The Reality: Death. The dead cannot be brought back, tlzepart cannot be changed.
The Fantasy.‘ A sudden reversal aftlzis intolerablefact.
This con has many variations, but requires great skill and subtlety.
The beauty and importance of the art of Vermeer have long been rec
ognized, but his paintings are small in number, and are extremely rare. In
the 1930s, though, Vermeers began to appear on the art market. Experts
were called on to verify them, and pronounced them real. Possession of
these new Vermeers would crown a collector’s career. It was like the resurrection of Lazarus: In a
strange way, Vermeer had been brought back to
life. The past had been changed.
Only later did it come out that the new Vermeers were the work of a
middle-aged Dutch forget named Han van Meegeren. And he had chosen
Vermeer for his scam because he understood fantasy: The paintings would
seem real precisely because the public, and the experts as well, so desperately wanted to believe they were.
Remember: The key to fantasy is distance. The distant has allure and
promise, seems simple and problem free. What you are offering, xhen,
should be ungraspable. Never let it become oppressively familiar; it is the
mirage in the distance, withdrawing as the sucker approaches. Never be
(no direct in describing the fantasywkeep it vague. As a
forget of fantasies,
let your victim come close enough to see and be tempted, but keep him far
away enough that he stays dreaming and desiring.
Image: The
Moon. Unattainable,
always changing shape,
disappezuing and reappearing. We look at it, imagine,
wonder, and pine——neVer fa.-
miliar, continuous provoker
of dreams. Do not offer
the obvious. Promise
the moon.
Authority: A lie is an alluremeut, a fabrication, that can be embellished into a
fantasy. It can be clothed in the raiments of a mystic
conception‘ Truth is cold, sober fact, not so comfortable to absorb.
A lie is more palatable. The most dctested person in the world is
the one who always tells the truth, who never romances. . . .
I found it far more interesting and profitable to romance than to
tell the truth. {Joseph Weil, a.l:.a. “The Yellow Kid,” l875wl976)
LAW 32 269
270 LAW 32
REVERSAL
If there is power in tapping into the fantasies of the masses, there is also
danger, Fantasy usually contains an element of play-the public half realizes it is being duped, but it keeps the dream alive anyway, relishing the en»
tertainment and the temporary diversion from the everyday that you are
providing. So keep it 1ight~—never come too close to the place where you
are actually expected to produce results. That place may prove extremely
hazardous.
After Bragadino established himself in Munich, he found that the
sober-minded Bavarians had far less faith in alchemy than the temperamental Venelians. Only the duke really believed in it, for he needed it des—
perately to rescue him from the hopeless mess he was in. As Bragadino
played his familiar waiting game, accepting gifts and expecting patience,
the public grew angry. Money was being spent and was yielding no results.
In 1592 the Bavarians demanded justice, and eventually Bragadino found
himself swinging from the gallows. As before, he had promised and had
not delivered, but this time he had misjudged the forbearance of his hosts,
and his inability to fulfill their fantasy proved fatal.
One last thing: Never make the mistake of imagining that fantasy is al»
ways fantastical. It certainly contrasts with reality, but reality itself is some
times so theatrical and stylized that fantasy becomes a desire for simple
things. The image Abraham Lincoln created of himself, for example, as a
homespun country lawyer with a beard, made him the common man’s
president.
P. T. Barnum created a successful act with Tom Thumb, a dwarf who
dressed up as famous leaders of the past, such as Napoleon, and iampooned them wickedly. The show delighted everyone, right up to Queen
Victoria, by appealing to the fantasy of the time: Enough of the vainglorious rulers of history, the common man knows best Tom Thumb reversed the familiar pattern of fantasy in which the strange and unknown
becomes the ideal. But the act still obeyed the Law, for underlying it
was the fantasy that the simple man is without problems, and is happier
than the powerful and the rich.
Both Lincoln and Tom Thumb played the commoner but carefully
maintained their distance. Should you play with such a
fantasy, you too
must carefully cultivate distance and not allow your “common” persona to
become too familiar or it will not project as fantasy.
LAW
33
DISCOVER EACH
MAN’S THUMBSCREW
jUDGMENT
Everyone has a weakness, a gap in the castle wall. That
weakness is usually an insecurity, an uncontrollable
emotion or need; it can also be a small seem! pleasure.
Either way, oncefound, it is a thumbscrew you can mm
to your advantage.
‘
271
VI llli l.lt)'\, |'lll*',
(‘ll\.\1l)l> .\\l) IVIII. l-OX
A lion was (‘lmsing a
Chamois along a valley.
lle had all but caught
it, and with lzmgirzg
(£)'€.\‘ was umicipuiirig 1:
certain and a
.w:i'.v_fying
repuss. I! serrnnl as if:1
won: ulrerly r’mp:;ssibl('
for me vmém to escape;
for at llwp ravine
uppnawd to bar the
wayfor bath the hunter
and flu’ hunted. Bur the
nimble Chamois: galliormg rzzgwher all its
smrngth, slml like an
arrow from a bow
across Ike Irh/um, and
xtnml still on Ilm rocky
c:'if]'tm the other side.
()u(1£rm pulled up
short. Hm at that!
moment 11 [riez-:1! ofhit
luappened to be near at
hand. Thu: frieml wus
the fox.
“WhaI."'suidl1e. “with
your stmngtlt and
agility, 1 ‘X possible
that you will yield to a
feeble L'lwmc-is? You
have only to Will. and
you will be ahle 10
work wm2zl:.'r.«:. Tlinuglx
the ab}-xss be deep, yet. if
you are tmly in earnest,
I um certain you will
clear it. Surely you can
C:7uf?dP in my disintereslczl friendship. I
would not expose _Vour
life In danger lfl wen’
not .\'(I well awure of
ynur strength and
dexmrity. "
The lions blood waxed
hot, and begun, in boil
in his veins. Hrflung
izt'rm‘r?if with all his
might irzm .€[7x2C!.’. But
he could not clear Illfi
cl1(mn.'io down he
lunLlJlczl headlong, and
was killed by the full.
272 LAW 33
FINDING THE THUMBSCREW: A Strategic Plan of Action
We all have resistances. We live with a perpetual armor around ourselves
to defend against change and the intrusive actions of friends and rivals. We
would like nothing more than to be lefi to do things our own way. Constantly butting up against these resistances will cost you a lot of energy.
One of the most important things to realize about people, though, is that
they all have a weakness, some part. of their psychological armor that will
not resist, that will bend to your will if you find it and push on it. Some pee»
ple wear their weaknesses openly, others disguise them. Those who dis
guise them are often the ones most effectively undone through that one
chink in their armor.
In planning your assault, keep these principles in mind:
Pay Attention to Gestures and Unconscious Signals. As Sigmund
Freud remarked, “No mortal can keep at secret. If his lips are silent, he chatters with his fingertips; betrayal oozes out of him at every pore.” This is a
critical concept in the search for a person’s weakness-—it is revealed by
seemingly unimportant gestures and passing words.
The key is not only what you look for but where and how you look.
Everyday conversaiion supplies the richest mine of weaknesses, so train
yourself to listen. Start by always seeming interested——~the appearance of a
sympathetic ear will spur anyone to talk. A clever trick, often used by the
nineteenth-century French statesman Talleyrand, is to appear to open up to
the other person, to share a secret with them. It can be completely made
up, or it can be real but of no great importance to you——-the important
thing is that it should seem to come from the heart. This will usually elicit at
response that is not only as frank as yours but more genuine»-a response
that reveals a weakness.
If you suspect that someone has a. particular soft spot, probe for it indi»
rectly. If, for instance, you sense that a man has a need to be loved, openly
flatter him. If he laps up your compliments, no matter how obvious, you
are on the right track. Train your eye for details——how someone tips a
waiter, what delights a person, the hidden messages in clothes. Find people-.’s idols, the things they worship and will do anything to get“-perhaps
you can be the supplier of their fantasies. Remember: Since we all my to
hide our weaknesses, there is little to be leamed from our conscious behavior. What oozes out in the little things outside our conscious control is what
you want to know.
Find the Helpless Child. Most weaknesses begin in childhood, before
the self builds up compensatory defenses. Perhaps the child was pampered
or indulged in a particular area, or perhaps a certain emotional need went
unfulfilled; as he or she grows older, the indulgence or the deficiency may
be buried but never disappears. Knowing about a childhood need gives
you a powerful key to a person’s weakness.
One sign of this weakness is that when you touch on it the person will
often act like a child. Be on the lookout, then, for any behavior that should
have been outgrown. If your victims or rivals went without something important, such as parental support, when they were children, supply it, or its
facsimile. Ifthey reveal a secret taste, a hidden indulgence, indulge it. In either case they will be unable to resist you.
Look for Contrasts. An overt trait often conceals its opposite. People
who thump their chests are often bigcowards; a prudish exterior may hide
a lascivious soul; the uptight are often screaming for adventure; the shy are
dying for attention. By probing beyond appearances, you will often find
people’s weaknesses in the opposite of the qualities they reveal to you.
Find the Weak Link. Sometimes in your search for weaknesses it is not
what but who that matters. In today’s versions of the court, there is often
someone behind the scenes who has a great deal of power, a tremendous
influence over the person superficially on top. These behind-tliescenes
powerbrokers are the group’s weak link: Win their favor and you indirectly
influence the king. Alternatively, even in a
group ofpeople acting with the
appearance of one will—as when a
group under attack closes ranks to resist
an outsi-:ler———there is always a weak link in the chain. Find the one person
who will bend under pressure.
Fill the Void. The two main emotional voids to Kill are insecurity and um
happiness. The insecure are suckers for any kind of social validation; as for
the chronically unhappy, look for the roots of their unhappiness. The inse
cure and the unhappy are the people least able to disguise their weaknesses. The ability to fill their emotional voids is a great source of power,
and an indefinitely prolongable one.
Feed on Uncontrollable Emotions. The uncontrollable emotion can be
a paranoid fear-wa fear disproportionate to the situaIion~—-or any base motive such as lust, greed, vanity, or hatred. People in the grip of these emotions often cannot control themselves, and you can do the controlling for
them.
OBSERVANCES OF THE LAW
Observance I
In 1615 the thirty—yeaH3ld bishop of Lugzon, later known as Cardinal Riche
lieu, gave a speech before representatives of the three estates of Franceclergy, nobility, and commoners. Richelieu had been chosen to serve as
the mouthpiece for the clergy—an immense responsibility for a man still
young and not particularly well known. On all of the important issues of
the day, the speech followed the Church line. But near the end of it Riche«
lieu did something that had nothing to do with the Church and everything
to do with his career. He turned to the throne of the fifteen-year—old King
Louis XIII, and to the Queen Mother Marie de’ Médicis, who sat beside
Then what did /uk dear
friend do? He
czzutiously made his
way down In rim
boumn nfrhe ravine.
and there, out in the
open space and the free
air. seeing that the lion
wan ted neitherflaliery
nor obedience now, he
set to work to pay the
[mt sad rim‘ to his
dead friend, and in ll
momh picked his bones
c/0.-m.
NABLES,
IVAN Ktumi-1:
l 768--I844
IR\'ll\1,' |..~\'/All
[Hollywood superzzgent] Irving Paul
Lazar was once
anxious to sell /studio
mogul] Jack L. Warner
a play. "I /mil a
long
rmzeting Wiih him
today,” Lazar
explained [10 scramwriter Garszm Kanin],
“hm Idir1n’I memion
it, I didn't even bring
it up.”
“Why noI?"Iasked.
“Because I ‘m going to
wait unit’! 1119 weekend
afier next, when I
go to
Palm Springs."
“I don ’£ wzdcrslzmri. ”
“You dorfr? I go to
Palm Springy every
wee/«end. but Warner
rim '1 going thi.S' week
end. Heb gal a preview
or sometlxing. S0 heir
pm! mm/Ing dawn till
rim Hex! weekeml, so
that‘: when I’m going
to bring it up.“
“Iwing, I
‘In more and
LAW 33 273
more crm/"med. ”
"Look "
mid Irving
irtzpatieritly. "I know
what I'm doing. I know
how or will Warner.
’l"Iu'.s: is a
type of mimnut that he Iv mu'a.\‘}'
with, so I have to hit
him with it hard and
surldenly to
gr»! an okay."
“lint why Palm
Springs?
"
“lirL'uuse in Palm
.‘v'pI’ing.s‘, (-very day he
goes to flu’ baths‘ Ill The
Spa. Am] thmiv where
I'm going to be when
hm‘ titcw. Now th:*ry’.\*
It thing ulmul .Im'k.- H23
cciglzty am! he’.v _,
vain, and In» doesn ‘I
like pwpr'c' to sec him
naked. 50 when I walk
up so [um N11/<<.'<l at The
S[)a—~ I utezm he‘s
1mk:,'(l———xw!I, I'm
t1l.lkL?(I mo, but I dun’:
an 3 who .\‘¢‘m' me, He
does; And I walk up [0
him nuktczf, and Lawn
to talk to him about
this thing. hrflt be very
:‘rnl1¢xI‘ru.v.s‘c11./lrad
he'll want to get away
from rue, and the L-'u.\‘Iest way is to my ‘Ye.x.‘
bc-mme he [wows tflw
mys ‘Nay (hm I'm
5,-m'ng tn xtirk with him,
and stay righl on in and
not give up. Sn to get
mt ufme. l1e‘Il probaMy say, ‘Y:/51"’
Two 1116:)/CS Iuzcr, t read
of Ike m:qu{sizr’mz of
this parucular propvrry
by Warner BroIIzer.~r. 1
p/:ou<’d Lazar and
a.\‘A'(,’(l lww fl had been
accom,'IIi.s'l1crt'. “llmv
do you think,"'lw
aximl. “In the buff,
tlmtfv how . . just the
way ltotd you it was
going to work."
um l.\’W0()D,
G!\R50?~J Kmum,
1974
274 LAW 33
Louis, as the regent ruling France until her son reached his majority. Everyone expected Richelieu to say the usual kind words to the young king. In
stead, however, he looked directly at and only at the queen mofher. indeed
his speech ended in long and fulsome praise ofher, praise so glowing that it
actually offended some in the Church. But the smile on the queen’s face as
she lapped up Richelielfs compliments was unforgettable.
A year later the queen mother appointed Richelieu secretary of state
for foreign affairs, an incredible coup for the young bishop. He had now
entered the inner circle ofpower, and he studied the workings of the court
as if it were the machinery of a watch. An Italian, Concino Concini, was
the queen mother’s favorite, or rather her lover, a role that made him perhaps the most powerful man in France. Concini was vain and foppish, and
Richelieu played him perfectly—-attending to him as if he were the king.
Within months Richelieu had become one of Concim"s favorites. But
something happened in 1617 that turned everything upside down: the
young king, who up until then had shown every sign of being an idiot, had
Concini murdered and his most important associates imprisoned. In so
doing Louis took command of the country with one blow, sweeping the
queen mother aside.
Had Richelieu played it wrong? He had been close to both Concini
and Marie de Médicis whose advisers and ministers were now all out of
favor, some even arrested. The queen mother herself was shut up in the
Louvre, a virtual prisoner. Richelieu wasted no time. If everyone was deserfing Marie de Médicis, he would stand by her. He knew Louis could not
get rid of her, for the king was still very young, and had in any case always
been inordinately attached to her. As Man'e’s only remaining powerful
friend, Richelieu filled the valuable function of liaison between the king
and his mother. In return he received her protection, and was able to sur—
vive the palace coup, even to thrive. Over the next few years the queen
mother grew still more dependent on him, and in 1622 she repaid him for
his loyalty: Through the intercession of her allies in Rome, Richelieu was
elevated to the powerful rank of cardinal.
By 1623 King Louis was in trouble. He had no one he could trust to
advise him, and although he was now a
young man instead of a boy, he re
mained childish in spirit, and affairs of state came hard to him. Now that he
had taken the throne, Marie was no longer the regent and theoretically had
no power, but she still had her son’s ear. and she kept telling him that
Richelieu was his only possible savior. At first Louis would have none of
it——-he hated the cardinal with a passion, only tolerating him out of love for
Marie. In the end, however, isolated in the court and crippled by his own
iudecisiveness, he yielded to his mother and made Richelieu fixst his chief
Councilor and later prime minister.
Now Richelieu no longer needed Marie de Médicis. He stopped visiting and courting her, stopped listening to her opinions, even argued with
her and opposed her wishes. Instead be concentrated on the king, making
himself indispensable to his new master. All the previous premiers, under
standing the king’s childishness, had tried to keep him out of trouble; the
shrewd Richelieu played him differently, deliberately pushing him into
one ambitious project after another, such as a crusade against the
Huguenots and finally an extended war with Spain. The immensity of
these projects only made the king more dependent on his powerful premier, the only man able to keep order in the realm. And so, for the next
eighteen years, Richelieu, exploiting the king’s weaknesses, governed and
molded France according to his own vision, unifying the country and making it a
strong European power for centuries to come.
lntcipretation
Richelieu saw everything as a military campaign, and no strategic move
was more important to him than discovering his enemy’s weaknesses and
applying pressure to them. As early as his speeoh in 1615, he was looking
for the weak link in the chain of power, and he saw that it was the queen
mother, Not that Marie was obviously weakmslie governed both France
and her son; but Richelieu saw that she was really an insecure woman who
needed constant masculine attention. He showered her with afiection and
respect, even toadying up to her favorite, Concini. He knew the day would
come when the king would take over, but he also recognized that Louis
loved his mother dearly and would always remain a child in relation to her.
The way to control Louis, then, was not by gaining his favor, which could
change overnight, but by gaining sway over his mother, for whom his afv
fection would never change.
Once Richelieu had the position he desiredm-prime minister———he discarded the queen mother, moving on to the next weak link in the chain:
the king‘s own character. There was a part of him that would always be a.
helpless child in need of higher authority. It was on the foundation of the
king’s weakness that Richelieu established his own power and fame.
Remember: When entering the court, find the weak link. The person
in control is often not the king or queen; it is someone behind the scenes-«
the favorite, the husband or wife, even the court fool. This person may
have more weaknesses than the king himself, because his power depends
on all kinds of capricious factors outside his control.
Finally, when dealing with helpless children who cannot make decisions, play on their weakness and push them into bold ventures, They will
have to depend on you even more, for you will become the adult figure
whom they rely on to get them out of scrapes and to safety.
Observance H
In December of 1925, guests at the swankiest hotel in Palm Beach, Florida,
watched with interest as a mysterious man arrived in a RoI1s—Royce dn'ven
by ajapanese chauffeur. Over the next few days they studied this hand~
some man, who walked with an elegant cane, received telegrams at all
hours, and only engaged in the briefest of conversations. He was a count,
they heard, Count Victor Lustig, and he came from one of the wealthiest
families in Europe—~but this was all they could find out.
Imagine their amazement, then, when Lustig one day walked up to
one of the least distinguished guests in the hotel, a Mr. Herman Loller,
Tlll" l,H"|’|,l£ '|'|||'\(IS
(,(ll‘\'ll
As time went on I wine
to look for the Iitllrt
weaknesses. . . . It’: the
liitfe tlrings that cmml.
OI; nice‘ nrazximz. I
worked on the pre5x'—
den! afa large bank in
Omulm. The [phony]
deal invnlwed the
purtlmye of (he ytrvcl
railway x_v.m=nz of
Omaha, includirlg a
bridge acros.\' IIII4
MISSI.YSip[)I RIVHL My
pr:'ncz'pal.r were sup/,»osally t'}t*mzarz am! I had
(0 rlegotitlle with
Iiurlirz. While awaiting
word from them. I
inrmrlz/(‘ed my fake
mining-stock proposre
/ion. Since this man
was rich, I decided to
play for high nuke. . .
Mearnvlzilzt Iplayed
golf with the Iyrmkrr.
visited his Imme, and
men: In rhc theater wizlz
him and his wife.
Ttmugh he showed
wine inter am? in my
xmck deal, he still
warn ‘I con virzced, I had
built it up In the point
that an in vestruem of
3 I,25(I.()0{) war
requirmi. Oflhis I was
(0 put up $9()().l)(l(), tho
Imrzker $35t),(IO0. But
still in» }zesr'€ti!m€.
One eve-mug when I
was at ilulf homflfor
(Iilmcr I wore xumo
perfume-—Coty '5 "April
Vi0le1.x" I! wax rm: {hm
considered effemimzle
for a man Ir) use u zlrlsh
z)_/‘pnrfurrze. The
(maker '3 wife though! ("I
very IIM'('I_V. "
W11 ere did
you get if?‘ "
“II is :1 rare blend, "
I told her, “especially
madefur me by u
LAW 33
I/rench per/}xrrie'r. Do
you lift? it?”
“I love it, ”3!to replied.
The following day I
went through my
cffctrts and found two
empty bonlrns. Bath hat]
come from France, but
went empty. I want It) (1
downtown department
rlure and ])llfC’llLl£’(l
ten ounces ofCot_v'.r
"April Vmlz. .
poured this into [its
two !"ren<:h bottles,
mrvfuliy xeulml «mm.
wrzzppwi them in
fissile paper.
That £.’Vl’HiIlg I dmppea’
by tlzr bankers‘ homeand presenled the two
btJttle.s' to his wife.
"They were especially
put up for me m
CoI()gne,"ltt;I(1/wr.
The next day the
bunker called at my
hotcl. Hi.\' wife was
mmprurerl by my
perfume, She t'zm§idcred it the most
W(>TI(l(‘?‘flil, (he mm!
l’.l‘OIi(“ frugraizctt she
hm! ever «med. 1 did no!
tell me banker he could
get ail In» warrtczi righ!
in Omtrhat.
“Site mid. "
the [tanker
adriatl, "that I was
formnule [0 be’ u.\:mt'iztttrtl with a man like
mat." Frmn than on his
uttilttde wax t‘/zarzged,
for he had (‘amp/ale
faith in his wt'fc3'jut1gmerit. . . , Ha partrrl
with $35(),0l)U. This,
incivieumlly was my
big,-;z¢'.rt [con] sums.
"YELLOW 1<u:“wr:t1,.
lX75—l‘J76
276 LAW 33
head of an engineering company, and entered into conversation with him.
Loller had made his fortune only recently, and forging social connections
was very important to him. He felt honored and somewhat intimidated by
this sophisticated man, who spoke perfect English with a hint of a
foreign
accent Over the days to come, the two became friends.
Loller of course did most of the talking, and one night he confessed
that his business was doing poorly, with more troubles ahead. In return,
Lustig confided in his new friend that he too had serious money
prob1ems——Communisls had seized his family estate and all its assets. He
was too old to learn a trade and go to work. Luckily he had found an an
swer——“a money—making machine." “You counterfeit?” Loller whispered in
half—shock. No, Lusiig replied, explaining that through a secret chemical
process. his machine could duplicate any paper currency with complete ac»
curacy. Put in a dollar bill and six hours laxer you had two, both perfect. He
proceeded to explain how the machine had been smuggled out of Europe,
how the Germans had developed it to undermine the British, how it had
supported the count for several years, and on and on. When Loller insisted
on a demonstration, the two men went to Lustig's room, where the count
produced a magnificent mahogany box fitted with slots, cranks, and dials.
Loller watched as Lustig inserted a. dollar bill in the box. Sure enough,
early the following morning Lustig pulled out two bills, still wet from the
chemicals.
Lustig gave the notes to Loller, who immediately took the bills to a
local bank—-——which accepted them as genuine. Now the businessman feverishly begged Lusug to sell him a machine. The count explained that there
was only one in existence, so Loller made him a high offer: $25,000, then a
considerable amount (more than $400,000 in today’s terms). Even so,
Lustig seemed reluctant: He did not feel right about making his friend pay
so much. Yet finally he agreed to the sale. After all, he said, “I suppose it
matters little what you pay me. You are, after all, going to recover the
amount within a few days by duplicating your own bills.” Making Loller
swear never to reveal the machine’s existence to other people, Lustig ac»
cepted the money. Later the same day he checked out of the hotel. A year
later, after many futile attempts at duplicating bills, Loller finally went to
the police with the story of how Count Lustig had conned him with a pair
of dollar bills, some chemicals, and a. worthless mahogany box.
Interpretation
Count Lustlg had an eagle eye for other people’s weaknesses. He saw them
in the smallest gesture. Loller, for instance, overtipped waiters, seemed
nervous in conversation with the concierge, talked loudly about his busi»
ness. His weakness, Lustig knew, was his need for social validation and for
the respect that he thought his wealth had earned him. He was also chronically insecure. Luslig had come to the hotel to hunt for prey. In Loller he
horned in on the perfect sucker»-—a man hungering for someone to fill his
psychic voids.
In offering Loller his friendship, then, Lustig knew he was offeringhim
the immediate respect of the other guests. As a count, Lustig was also offer-
ing the newly rich businessman access to the glittering world of old wealth.
And for the coup de grace, he apparently owned a machine that would rescue Loller from his worries. It would even put him on a
par with Lustig
himself, who had also used the machine to maintain his status. No wonder
Loller took the bait.
Remember: When searching for suckers, always look for the dissatisfled, the unhappy, the insecure. Such people are riddled with weaknesses
and have needs that you can fill. Their neediness is the groove in which
you place your thumbnail and turn them at will.
Observance III
In the year 1559, the French king Henri ll died in a
jousting exhibition. His
son assumed the throne, becoming Francis 11, but in the background stood
Henri’s wife and queen, Catherine de’ Médjcis, a woman who had long
ago proven her skill in affairs of state. When Francis died the next year,
Catlierine took control of the country as regent to her next son in line of
succession, the future Charles IX, a mere ten years old at the time.
The main threats to the queens power were Antoine de Bourbon, king
of Navarre, and his brother, Louis, the powerful prince of Condé, both of
whom could claim the right to serve as regent instead of Catherine, who,
after all, was Italian——-a foreigner. Catherine quickly appointed Antoine
lieutenant general of the kingdom, a title that seemed to satisfy his ambition. It also meant that he had to remain in court, where Catherine could
keep an eye on him. Her next move proved smarter still: Antoine had a
notorious weakness for young women, so she assigned one of her most attractive maids of honor, Louise de Rouet, to seduce him. Now Antoine’s
intimate, Louise reported all of his actions to Catherine. The move worked
so brilliantly that Catherine assigned another of her maids to Prince
Condé, and thus was formed her atcadron 2mla1Lt——“lly1'ng squadron”-—of
young grls whom she used to keep the unsuspecting males in the court
under her control.
In 1572 Catherine married 05 her daughter, Marguerite de Valois, to
Henri, the son ofAntoine and the new king ofNavarre. To put a
family that
had always struggled against her so close to power was a dangerous move,
so to make sure of Henri’s loyalty she unleashed on him the loveliest member of her “flying squadron,” Charlotte de Beaune Semblancay, baroness
ofSauves. Catherine did this even though Henri was married to her daughter. Within weeks, Marguerite de Valois wrote in her memoirs, “Mme. de
Sauves so completely ensnared my husband that we no longer slept together, nor even conversed.”
The baroness was an excellent spy and helped to keep Henri under
Cathei-ine’s thumb. W’hen the queen’s youngest son, the Duke ofAlencon,
grew so close to Henri that she feared the two might plot against her, she
assigned the baroness to him as well. This most infamous member of the
flying squadron quickly seduced Alengon, and soon the two young men
fought over her and their friendship quickly ended, along with any danger
of a conspiracy.
And while I am on the
subject, them is artwher
fact that d¢'.vvrw’s
mmrimi. It is this. A
man sltows his churat:«
{er just in the way in
which he deals‘ with
tr1fz‘es—~for than he IS
ojfliis guard. This will
ofzeri zzfford tl good
opparmni/y ofalzserw
ing the boundless
egnism of a mun ‘.5’
nature, and his f0!Il/
luck oirunsidemlitm
for orlzyrs; and iffht'.Yl’
defects show (Izmiselvw in small I/tings,
or merely in his general
rlz-mmmmr. you will
find (Ital they ll/S/J
underlie his uctirm in
matters ofimportance,
although he may
dlS‘gt(i5‘t‘ the furl. Tlzis it
an opportunity w/Itch
should not be nzmml.
Ifin the little u_/jrmzv of
every day-«the tn,’/{er of
life . , .—- a man is
inctzn.vizlcrute and stir!/x'.t
only what is advumw
gmus or mnvertizmt to
lzimsvlfi to tho prejudrcv olotlicrrs’ riglm; if
he opprrrprialcs to
his-n.s-«Ifrim! which
bzdorzgs to all alilm, you
may be Aura there is no
jItsliCL' in ]ti.\‘ heart. and
that he would be a
xcnumlrsl rm a witch’-
sale scale, only that law
and cvnipulsion bind
Ixis hands".
A RT] urn
Srtic)Pt:NII/umk.
1788 1860
LAW 33 277
'l'l||I ll \ F'|‘|.lt r’\'l‘
Pll;\R>i,\l.l.\
When the (W1) armies
/Julius Cazamriv tmrl
Pampry’s] were came
intu Plturyzllitt, and
both mmmpterl Ilwre.
Pompreyis tlzrmghtx ran
the xurne way as they
had done before,
agtumtfiglztiug. . . . But
those who were about
him were grmtly (,’(mflzlrm o nu‘cz'ss. . , us if
tlugv hml «I/ready
mru/uerod. . . . The
rruvulrv t.'.i‘/7r'<tt'all_v were
obstinate farfigltrtrzg,
bflmg vplerzt/izlly armed
and bravely mnuntzvrl.
and valuirtg thmzsrelves
upon thcfine horses
they kept, and upon
their own handmrm"
persons.‘ as also upon
the atlvunmgc of their
numl1er\'. for they were
five Ihtmyaml against
one thousand of
(Trtcxtrrit. Nor were the
number: ofthe infamr_v
less t1i.\[Irt)pnrtitmult'.
there lwing forty-five
thousand of Pompey It
uguimt !WL’7t/‘V-(wt)
thottsunrl uflho enemy.
(The mut day] whilst
the infantry was thus
sharply engagml in the
main battle, on the
/tcmh POInp4:y'.s' horse
rode up am,/irlemly.
and npenerl [his
cavalry'.s'l ranks very
wide, that they might
surround the right wing
of Caesar. But before
they engaged, Caesar's
whorls l'll.\’h€(I out and
attacked them, and did
not dun their mveltus
at a tlistarm’. I1rN‘.S‘lrlh‘('
at the thighv and legs,
as they usually did in
rlose battle. but aimerl
at tlmir frurcx. For thus
275 LAW 33
Interpretation
Catherine had seen very early on the sway that a mistress has over a man
of power: Her own husband, Henri II, had kept one of the most infamous
mistresses of them all, Diane de Poitiers. What Catherine learned from the
experience was that a man like her husband wanted to feel he could win a
woman over without having to rely on his status, which he had inherited
rather than earned. And such a need contained a huge blind spot: As long
as the woman began the affair by acting as if she had been conquered, the
man would fail to notice that as dine passed the mistress had come to hold
power over him, as Diane de Poitiers did over Henri. It was Catherine’s
strategy to turn this weakness to her advantage, using it as a way to conquer
and control men. All she had to do was unleash the loveliest women in the
court, her “flying squadron,” on men whom she knew shared her hus«
ba.nd’s vulnerability.
Remember. Always look for passions and obsessions that cannot be
controlled. The stronger the passion, the more vulnerable the person. This
may seem surprising, for passionate people look strong. In fact, however,
they are simply filling the stage with their theatricality, distracting people
from how weak and helpless they really are. A man’s need to conquer
women actually reveals a tremendous helplessness that has made suckers
out of them for thousands of years. Look at the part of a
person that is most
visible—their greed, their lust, their intense fear. These are the emotions
they cannot conceal, and over which they have the least control. And what
people cannot control, you can control for them.
Observance IV
Arabella Huntington, wife of the great late-nineteenth-century railroad
magnate Collis P. Huntington, came from humble origins and always
struggled for social recognition among her wealthy peers. When she gave a
party in her San Francisco mansion, few of the social elite would show up;
most of them took her for a gold digger, not their kind. Because of her husband’s fabulous wealth, art dealers courted her, but with such condescension they obviously saw her as an upstart. Only one man of consequence
treated her difl’erently: the dealer Joseph Duveen.
For the first few years of Duveen’s relationship with Arabella, he made
no eifort to sell expensive art to her. Instead he accompanied her to fine
stores, chatted endlessly about queens and princesses he knew, on and on.
At last, she thought, a man who treated her as an equal, even a
superior, in
high society. Meanwhile, if Duveen did not try to sell art to her, he did subtly educate her in his aesthetic ideas——n-amely, that the best at was the
most expensive art. And after Arabella had soaked up his way of seeing
things, Duveen would act as if she always had exquisite taste, even though
before she met him her aesthetics had been abysmal.
When Collis Huntington died, in 1900, Arabella came into a fortune.
She suddenly started to buy expensive paintings, by Rembrandt and
Velazquez, for exa.rnple—and only from Duveen. Years later Duveen sold
her Gainsb0rough’s Blue Boy for the highest price ever paid for a work of
art at the time, an astounding purchase for a. family that previously had
shown little interest in collecting.
Interpretation
joseph Duveen instantly understood Arabella Huntington and what made
her tick: She wanted to feel important, at home in society. lntensely insecure about her lowerclass background, she needed confirmation of her
new social smtus. Duveen waited. lnstead of rushing into trying to persuade her to collect art, he subtly went to work on her weaknesses. He
made her feel that she deserved his attention not because she was the wife
of one of the wealthiest men in the world but because of her own special
character--and this completely melted her. Duveen never condescended
to Arabella; rather than lecturing to her, he instilled his ideas in her indirectly. The result was one of his best and most devoted clients, and also the
sale of The Bhze Bay.
People’s need for validation and recognition, their need to feel impor~
tant, is the best kind of weakness to exploit. First, it is almost universal; second, exploiting it is so very easy. All you have to do is find ways to make
people feel better about their taste, their social standing, their intelligence.
Once the fish are hooked, you can reel them in again and again, for
yea.rs——you are filling a positive role, giving them what they cannot get on
their own. They may never suspect that you are turning them like a thumb«
screw, and if they do they may not care, because you are making them feel
better about themselves, and that is worth any price.
Observance V
In 1862 King William of Prussia named Otto Von Bismarck premier and
minister for foreign affairs. Bismarck was known for his boldness, his a.rnbi~
tion—~and his interest in strengthening the military. Since Wflliam was surrounded by liberals in his ghvemment and cabinet, politicians who already
wanted to limit his powers, it was quite dangerous for him to put Bismarck
in this sensitive position. His wife, Queen Augusta, had tried to dissuade
him, but although she usually got her way with him, this time William
stuck to his guns.
Only a week after becoming prime minister, Bismarck made an impromptu speech to a few dozen ministers to convince them of the need to
enlarge the army. He ended by saying, “The great questions of the time
will be decided, not by speeches and resolutions of majorities, but by iron
and blood.” His speech was immediately disseminated throughout Germany. The queen screamed at her husband that Bismarck was a barbaric
militar-ist who was out to usurp control of Prussia, and that William had to
fire him. The liberals in the government agreed with her. The outcry was
so vehement that Williarn began to be afraid he would end up on a scaffold, like Louis XVI of France, if he kept Bismarck on as prime minister.
Bismarck knew he had to get to the king before it was too late. He also
knew he had blundered, and should have tempered his fiery words. Yet as
he contemplated his strategy, he decided not to apologize but to do the
exact opposite, Bismarck knew the king well.
(Yzciar had in;trloczirri
them, in ltoper rim:
young gentlemen, who
hurl not known much
c‘/flzutrlnr and wounds,
but came wearing their
hair long. in zhzvflower
nfrheir age and height
of thllll’ beauty, would
be more uppre/1t’r1.s'ive
afiuch blows, and not
am: for lmzurding hmh
a dangrlr II! pr:-smu cum’
1: bleniish far the
future,
And so itpmved, for
they were .m_/nrfrom
l.Vc'rzr‘11-xg the xtmke of
rlw javclins, that Iizey
could not Slund the
sight oft/rem. but
turned about, and
covered their 1224,-es to
xc-cure rhem. ()nm in
rlimrdm; pr:-xemly they
ruined ubom Ia /iy; and
so most shamcfully
ruilwd all. For (hm?
who hm] hm! then:
back at once
nmfimzkeri the infamry.
and falling on their
rear, cu! then: (0 pieces
Pompey, who
commanded the r)Ihr=r
wing of the army, whorl
hr Saw his raw:/ry rims
broken llfldflfiflg. was
no longer lzimself; nor
did he now I'eI11ember
that he was Pompey the
Gmzt, bur, likp one
whom some god /(ml
tlepriwd of/Iii‘ s'em'e.i',
rt/Iired In his mu without speaking /1 word,
and there ml to (’,.\:]7(’(’I
the event. til! the whole
army was routed.
THE LIFE or l\)!.lUS
<‘A(=.SAl<.
P: v
-\!<( H.
c A.n.~1o—-12!)
LAW 33 279
280 LAW 33
When the two men met, William, predictably, had been worked into a
tizzy by the queen. He reiterated his fear of being guillotined. But Bismarck
only replied, “Yes, then we shall be dead! We must die sooner or later, and
could there be a more respectable way of dying? I should die lighting for
the cause of my king and master. Your Majesty would die sealing with your
own blood your royal rights granted by God’s graze. Whether upon the
scafiold or upon the battlefield makes no difference to the glorious staking
of body and life on behalf of rights granted by God’s grace!“ On he went,
appealing to William’s sense of honor and the majesty of his position as
head of the army. How could the king allow people to push him around?
Wasn’t the honor ofGermany more important than quibbling over words?
Not only did the prime minister convince the king to stand up to both his
wife and his parliament, he persuaded him to build up the am1y—Bismatclwfs goal all along.
Interpretation
Bismarck knew the king felt bullied by those around him. He knew that
William had a military background and a deep sense of honor, and that he
felt ashamed at his cravenness before his wife and his government. Wdliam
secretly yearned to be a
great and mighty king, but he dared not express
this ambition because he was afraid of ending up like Louis XVI. Where a
show of courage often conceals a man’s timidity, William’s timidity concealed his need to show courage and thump his chest.
Bismarck sensed the longing for glory beneath William’s pacifist front,
so he played to the king’s insecurity about his manhood, finally pushing
him into three wars and the creation of a German empire. Timidity is a. potent weakness to exploit. Timid souls often yearn to be their opposite——to
be Napoleons. Yet they lack the inner strength. You, in essence, can become their Napoleon, pushing them into bold actions that serve your
needs while also making them dependent on you. Remember: Look to the
opposites and never take appearances at face value.
Image: The
Thumbscrew.
Your enemy
has secrets that
he guards, thinks
thoughts he will
not reveal. But
they come out in
ways he cannot
help. It is there some
where, a
groove of
weakness on his head,
at his heart, over his
belly. Once you find the
groove, put your thumb in
it and turn him at will.
Authority: Finzi out each man’s thumbscrew. "l‘is the art of setting their
wills in action. It needs more skill than resolution. You must know
where to get at anyone. Every volition has a special motive which varies
according to taste. All men are idolaters, some of fame, others of selfinterest, must of pleasure. Skill consists in knowing these idols in order
to bring them into play. Knowing any man’s rnainspring of motive
you have as it were the key to his will. (Baltasar Gracién, 1601-1658)
REVERSAL
Playing on people’s weakness has one significant danger: You may stir up
an action you cannot control.
In your games of power you always look several steps ahead and plan
accordingly. And you exploit the fact that other people are more emotional
and incapable of such foresight. But when you play on their vulnerabilities,
the areas over which they have least control, you can unleash emotions
that will upset your plans. Push timid people into bold action and they may
go too far; answer their need for attention or recognition and they may
need more than you want to give them. The helpless, childish element you
are playing on can turn against you.
The more emotional the weakness, the greater the potential danger.
Know the limits to this game, then, and never get carried away by your
control over your victims. You are after power, not the thrill of control.
LAW 33 281
34
BE ROYAL IN YOUR OWN
FASHION: ACT LIKE A
KING TO BE TREATED
LIKE ONE
JUDGMENT
The way you ccmy yourself will often determine how you
are treated: [71, the long mm, appearing vulgar or common will make people disrespect you. For a
king respects
himself and zflspires the same xmtimmt in others. By
acting regzzlly and confident ofyaur powers, you make
yourself seem destined to wear 52 crown.
TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW
In July of 1830, a revolution broke out in Paris that forced the king,
Charles X, to abdicate. A commission of the highest authorities in the land
gathered to choose a successor, and the man they picked was LouisPhilippe, the Duke of Orleans.
From the beginning it was clear that Louis~Philippe would be a differ
am kind of king, and not just because he came from a different branch of
the royal family, or because he had not inherited the crown but had been
given it, by a commission, putting his legitimacy in question. Rather it was
that he disliked ceremony and the trappings of royalty; he had more
friends among the bankers than among the nobility; and his style was not
to create a new kind ofroyal rule, as Napoleon had done, but to downplay
his status, the better to mix with the businessmen and middle-class folk
who had called him to lead. Thus the symbols that came to be associated
with Louis-Philippe were neither the scepter nor the crown, but the gray
hat and umbrella with which he would proudly walk the streets of Paris, as
if he were a bourgeois out for a stroll. VVhen Louis—Philippe invited James
Rothschild, the most important banker in France, to his palace, he treated
him as an equal. And unlike any king before him, not only did he talk business with Monsieur Rothschild but that was literally all he talked, for he
loved money and had amassed a huge fortune.
As the reign of the “bourgeois king” plodded on, people came to de
spire him. The aristocracy could not endure the sight of an unkingly king,
and within a few years they turned on him. Meanwhile the growing class of
the poor, including the radicals who had chased out Charles X, found no
satisfaction in a ruler who neither acted as a king norgoverned as a man of
the people. The bankers to whom Louis-Philippe was the most beholden
soon realized that it was they who controlled the country, not he, and they
treated him with growing contempt. One day, at the start of a train trip organized for the royal family, James Rothschild actually berated him-and
iri public-—for being late. Once the king had made news by treating the
banker as an equal; now the banker treated the king as an inferior.
Eventually the workers’ insurrections that had brought down LouisPhi1ippe’s predecessor began to ree.-merge, and the king put them down
with force. But what was he defending so brutally? Not the institution of the
monarchy, which he disdained, nor a democratic republic, which his rule
prevented. What he was really defending, it seemed, was his own fortune,
and the fortunes of the bankers—-not a way to inspire loyalty among the
citizenry.
In early 1848, Frenchmen of all classes began to demonstrate for electoral reforms that would make the country truly democratic. By February
the demonstrations had turned violent. To assuage the populace, LouisPhilippe fired his prime minister and appointed a liberal as a
replacement.
But this created the opposite of the desired effect: The people sensed they
could push the king around. The demonstrations turned into a
l'ull~fledged
revolution, with gunfire and barricades in the streets.
z'\/ever [are your
self-rre¢‘[)ect. nor be too
fimu/far with yourself
. when you are alone.
I11 yrmr imegri/{V ilxr,-If
be your own rraizdard
of rrclilude. and he
more indebted to (he
Arvrzrily oj'yuur awn
judgnmit ofyaum-elf
than to all external
prewpls. Desist from
mlsreemly rundurr.
rather our of respect
for your own virme
than for Ike .a‘n'i(l1rrr?5
cvfexlernal zzurlzoriry.
Come (0 hold yourself
in awe. and you will
have no need of
Smear’; zrrmginury
tutor.
BAIII.-NS/\R GRA(~m.\'.
1001 I058
LAW 34 293
284 LAW 34
On the night of February 23, a crowd of Parisians surrounded the
palace. With a suddenness that caught everyone by surprise, LouisPhilippe abdicated that very evening and fled to England. He left no sue»
cessor, nor even the suggestion of one-—his whole government folded up
and dissolved like a
traveling circus leaving town.
Interpretation
Louis-Philippe consciously dissolved the aura that natu.rally pertains to
kings and leaders. Scoffing at the symbolism of grandeur, he believed a
new world was dawning, where rulers should act and be like ordinary citi
zens. He was right: A new world, without kings and queens, was certainly
on its way. He was profoundly wrong, however, in predicting a change in
the dynamics of power.
The bourgeois king’s hat and umbrella amused the French at first, but
soon grew irritating. People knew that Louis-Philippe was not really like
them at all—that the hat and umbrella were essentially a kind of trick to encourage them in the fantasy that the country had suddenly grown more
equal. Actually, though, the divisions of wealth had never been greater.
The French expected their ruler to be a bit of a showman, to have some
presence. Even a radical like Robespierre, who had briefly come to power
during the French Revolution fifty years earlier, had understood this, and
cenainly Napoleon, who had turned the revolutionary republic into an im
per-ial regime, had known it in his bones. Indeed as soon as Louis—Phi1ippe
fled the stage, the French revealed their true desire: They elected
Napoleon’s grand-nephew president. He was a virtual unknown, but they
hoped he would recreate the great general’s powerful aura, erasing the
awkward memory of the “bourgeois king.”
Powerful people may be tempted to affect a common-man aura, trying
to create the illusion that they and their subjects or underlings are basically
the same. But the people whom this false gesture is intended to impress will
quickly see through it. They understand that they are not being given more
power——that it only appears as if they shared in the powerful person’s fate.
The only kind of common touch that works is the kind ailected by Franklin
Roosevelt, a style that said the president shared values and goals with the
common people even while he remained a patrician at heart. He never
pretended to erase his distance from the crowd.
Leaders who try to dissolve that distance through a false chumrniness
gradually lose the ability to inspire loyalty, fear, or love. Instead they elicit
contempt. Like Louis—Philippe, they are too uninspiring even to be worth
the guillotine-——the best they can do is simply vanish in the night, as if they
were never there.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
When Christopher Columbus was trying to find funding for his legendary
voyages, many around him believed he came from the Italian aristocracy.
This view was passed into history through a biography written after the explorer’s death by his son, which describes him as a descendant of a Count
Colombo ofthe Castle of Cuccaro in Montferrat. Colombo in turn was said
to be descended from the legendary Roman general Colonius, and two of
his first cousins were supposedly direct descendants of an emperor of Con
stantinople. An illustrious background indeed. But it was nothing more
than illustrious fantasy, for Columbus was actually the son of Domenico
Colombo, a humble weaver who had opened a wine shop when Christa»
pher was a
young man, and who then made his living by selling cheese.
Columbus himself had created the myth of his noble background, because from early on he felt that destiny had singled him out for great
things, and that he had a kind ofroyalty in his blood. Accordingly he acted
as if he were indeed descended from noble stock. After an uneventful career as a merchant on 3 commercial vessel, Columbus, Originally from
Genoa, settled in Lisbon. Using the fabricated story of his noble back
ground, he married into an established Lisbon family that had excellent
connections with Portuguese royalty.
Through his in—laws, Columbus finagled a meeting with the king of
Portugahjoao II, whom he petitioned to finance a westward voyage aimed
at discovering a shorter route to Asia. In return for announcing that any
discoveries he achieved would be made in the kings name, Columbus
Ihwanted a series of rights: the title Grand Admiral of the Oceanic Sea; the
office of Viceroy over any lands he found; and 10 percent of the future
commerce with such lands. All of these rights were to be hereditary and for
all time. Columbus made these demands even though he had previously
been a mere merchant, he knew almost nothing about navigation, he could
not work a quadrant, and he had never led a
group of men. In short he had
absolutely no qualifications for the journey he proposed. Furthermore, his
petition included no details as to how he would accomplish his plans, just
vague promises.
“Then Columbus finished his pitch, joao II smiled: He politely declined the offer, but left the door open for the future. Here Columbus must
have noticed something he would never forget: Even as the king turned
down the sailor’s demands, he treated them as legitimate. He neither
laughed at Columbus nor questioned his background and credentials. In
fact the king was impressed by the boldness of Columbus’s requests, and
clearly felt comfortable in the company of a man who acted so confidently.
The meeting must have convinced Columbus that his instincts were cor‘
rect: By asking for the moon, he had instantly raised his own status, for the
king assumed that unless a man who set such a high price on himself were
mad, which Columbus did not appear to be, he must somehow be worth it.
A few years later Columbus moved to Spain. Using his Portuguese
connections, he moved in elevated circles at the Spanish court, receiving
subsidies from illustrious financiers and sharing tables with dukes and
princes. To all these men be repeated his request for financing for a
voyage
to the we-st——and also for the rights he had demanded from joao II. Some,
such as the powerful duke of Medina, wanted to help, but could not, since
they lacked the power to grant him the titles and rights he wanted, But
Columbus would not back down. He soon realized that only one person
Illl'I*m:I,1~,Im..- AT
?4l(I\’().\
In rim mun gwwrminn
rhe /izmi/y lwecnrne
mm]: more ftlmom
/Ium before Ilzmugh I/zr?
distinctimr conferred
upnn u by Clam-rlrenm
[he nzusler of .\‘ic_wn.
(.'lt'ix1/runes . . . had a
zlnugltmg Agarzstu,
whom he wished to
marry to lite‘ best man
in all (fruece. 30 during
1/2/z 0l'_wrpi4* gxlnmy, in
whirl: he had him. .r’_,s"
mm the Chariot race, he
had a pm‘)lir; amumnczh
men! murlc, to the e/Ierl
that any Greek who
mcmghr himselfgood
enough to becunze
(,‘lr:i.v1hcnc.v' .s'rm—in-law
should presrnt Irirzzwlf
iw‘.rherI-becuu.\‘e he
:‘mm(lc‘d, willxiri the
ymr /ollowirzg the
ulrtirilh day, In hr,-Imlh
his (1(llIg}l(t’I‘ In Jzw
/inure husbrmd
Cl1*is!}rzvu'.v liar! had a
racetrack and .1
u'r(’xIIing~rir1K i‘p(!<'iullv
fllflt/(’ for Iris purpose,
and pmwntly the nu"!-
am‘ begun to nr/ive——
every num of (Irerrk
nationalily who had
mrrmtlairzg 11) be /mmd
nf rairlmr in /1 ix country
or in fiirmx»/fl . . .
Cl('i.s'1h(.'n£‘.$' began I?)-
rzvkilig mclz [«.z_['rhc
/mnmmur .s'uimrs/ in
turn to nmnc his (mmrry um! parvn/:1ge;IIx(-n
he kepz r/rem in }Is'.\‘
Iinzme for a year. In get
to know man: well.
entering mm a2nversa—
mm with (hem S()IIl€A
timer singly. .s'()me‘Iime5
all mg:-Jlwr, and rmling
each. of them for lzir
LAW 34 285
manly quuliliztr «ml
te'm,n£'r. edumlirm and
manners. . . But my
mm! impnmml ms! of
all was t/m‘r lnalmvirmr
at the dinnurmlilo. All
this wmz on throughout their wry in Sz't'y(:/1.
and all {he mm‘ he
enlerraimm‘ (hem fraud»
snmr'iy_
For Um’ !t‘G.)'t)fl or
(n.v,(:£’lu’I ix‘ was the lwo
Allsmiarzs who
lmpmrsed C/€{a'rI1en(‘.v
most /'mrnmm'7l_v. and
0/"Ike Iwn Ti,mrrdw".s'
sun lIl[)pr)t'lL‘l(lL'.\‘ mine
(0 be pre_/errretl. . . .
At last l/H.’ duy curnt’
which had been /ixwi
for the belrrrrlmrl, and
Clni.n‘l1e1irz,r had to
declare his ('iznice. Ile"
nmrkczl the day by tin’
sczcrzfice rafa hurztirml
oxen. and Ilzen grew: ti
great banquet, In whirl:
not only the .rm'Im'.s‘ but
everyone ufrmte in
Sicyvn was invitrszl.
When dinner was over.
the .\'u[t0r5 lacgzm Ir)
cornpcle with (‘MC’)
allmr in mum‘ and in
talking in mmpmzy.
In both tirtasv at'mm~
[)ll.Y/llIIL’Ill.\‘ II was
f1ip;)o<‘l1'i'¢z’e.i' who
pmvetl by far 1129
zloughiicsl clmmpiurl,
until at lam. as more
and rrmre wine Wm
drunk, he asked Ill!‘
fluIt’—[)l{1}'(‘I‘I(I play him
a tune and began m
dance to it. Now it may
well be than ht,’ rlumsorl
to his own .mzis-/‘action;
C‘leirthene.s‘. howevvr,
who was wan.‘/ting
the perjmnmncc.
begun to have .s‘eriou\'
dmzlrfs about the wlwle
larzsiners. Presemly.
after a brirfprizaw.
Ilippzrr/eidtai rm: for :1
table; the table was
brought, and
2.56 LAW 34
could meet his demands: Queen Isabella. In 1487 he finally managed a
meeting with the queen, and although he could not convince her to finance
the voyage, he completely charmed her, and became a
frequent guest in
the palace.
In 1492 the Spanish finally expelled the Moorish invaders who centuries earlier had seized parts of the country. With the wartime burden on
her treasury lifted, Isabella felt she could finally respond to the demands of
her explorer friend, and she decided to pay for three ships, equipment, the
salaries of the crews, and a modest stipend for Columbus. More important,
she had a. contract drawn up that granted Columbus the titles and rights on
which he had insisted. The only one she denied——and only in the contract’s
fine print—was the 10 percent of all revenues from any lands discovered:
an absurd demand, since he wanted no time limit on it. (Had the clause
been left in, it would eventually have made Columbus and his heirs the
wealthiest family on the planet. Columbus never read the fine print.)
Satisfied that his demands had been met, Columbus set sail that same
year in search of the passage to Asia. (Before he left he was careful to hire
the best navigator he could find to help him get there.) The mission failed
to find such a
passage, yet when Columbus petitioned the queen to finance
an even more ambitious voyage the following year, she agreed. By then
she had come to see Columbus as destined for great things.
Interpretation
As an explorer Columbus was mediocre at best. He knew less about the
sea than did the average sailor on his ships, could never determine the latitude and longitude of his discoveries, mistook islands for vast continents,
and treated his crew badly. But in one area he was a genius: He knew how
to sell himself. How else to explain how the son of a cheese vendor, a. lowlevel sea merchant, managed to ingratiate himself with the highest royal
and aristocratic families?
Columbus had an amazing power to charm the nobility, and it all
came from the way he carried himself. He projected a sense of confidence
that was completely out ofproportion to his means. Nor was his confidence
the aggressive, ugly selfipromotion of an upsmrt—it was a quiet and calm
selflassurance. In fact it was the same confidence usually shown by the no
bility themselves. The powerful in the o1d—style aristocracies felt no need to
prove or assert themselves; being noble, they knew they always deserved
more, and asked for it. With Columbus, then, they felt an instant aflinity,
for he carried himself just the way they clid——elevated above the crowd,
destined for greatness.
Understand: It is within your power to set your own price. How you
carry yourself reflects what you think of yourself. If you ask for little, shuffle your feet and lower your head, people will assume this reflects your
character. But this behavior is not you»-—it is only how you have chosen to
present yourself to other people. You can just as easily present the Colum~
bus front: buoyancy, confidence, and the feeling that you were born to
wear a crown.
With all great decsivm there is a noteworthy occummre to which they owe their
power. In the actual act ofdeception they are overcome by belief in themselves: it is
this which then speaks so miraculously and campellingly to those mound them.
F7“H’(i7”iC}L Nietzr4‘Iu.>, I6‘-’r‘4— I 900
KEYS TO POWER
As children, we start our lives with great exuberance, expecting and demanding everything from the world. This generally carries over into our
first forays into society, as we begin our careers. But as we grow older the
rebuffs and failures we experience set up boundaries that only get firmer
with time. Coming to expect less from the world, we accept limitations that
are really self-imposed. ‘We start to bow and scrape and apologize for even
the simplest of requests. The solution Lo such a shrinking of horizons is to
deliberately force ourselves in the opposite direction-——to downplay the
failures and ignore the limitations, to make ourselves demand and expect
as much as the child. To accomplish this, we must use a particular strategy
upon ourselves. Call it the Strategy of the Crown.
The Strategy of the Crown is based on a
simple chain of cause and effect: If we believe we are destined for great things, our belief will radiate
outward, just as a crown creates an aura around a king. This outward radiance will infect the people around us, who will think we must have reasons
to feel so confident. People who wear crowns seem to feel no inner sense of
the limits to what they can ask for or what they can accomplish. This too
radiates outward. Limits and boundaries disappear. Use the Strategy of the
Crown and you will be surprised how often it bears fruit. Take as an exa.m~
ple those happy children who ask for whatever they want, and get it. Their
high expectations are their charm. Adults enjoy granting their wishes-——just
as Isabella enjoyed granting the wishes of Columbus.
Throughouthistory, people ofundistinguished birth-—-the Theodora: of
‘Byzantium, the Columbuses, the Beethovens, the Disraelis-——-have managed
to work the Strategy ofthe Crown, believing so firmly in their own greatness
that it becomes a seIf~fulfil1ing prophecy. The trick is simple: Be overcome
by your selfibelief. Even while you know you are practicing a kind of deception on yourself, act like a king. You are likely to be treated as one.
The crown may separate you from other people, but it is up to you to
make that separation real: You have to act differently, demonstrating your
distance from those around you. One way to emphasize your difference is
to always act with dignity, no matter the circumstance. Louis~Philippe gave
no sense of being different from other people—he was the banker king.
And the moment his subjects threatened him, he caved in. Everyone
sensed this and pounced. Lacking regal dignity and firmness of purpose,
Louis-Philippe seemed an impostor, and the crown was easily toppled
from his head.
Regal bearing should not be confused with arrogance. Arrogance may
seem the king’s entitlement, but in fact it betrays insecurity. It is the very
opposite of a
royal demeanor.
Ilippo('{oir1<<s'. rlimhing
on to it, dancvtrl first
Mwli’ Lucrmmn zlaazces,
marl some Attic ones,
and endnl by mzmlilzg
on his" In-ad and Imuirzg link‘ with his legs in
1/11’ air. The I.z11‘mu'an.
andAttic rlwzces were
but! mough; bur
Clei.\‘IlLm(e.\‘, I/tough
he alrmrly lomlzezl I/11>
I/tough! ofhlwing R
San -m~1aw like Ahm.
new/'!l1el¢'&r res-rrairxecl
lzimself mm’ nzzmogcd
to amid an m,uImr,s.r;
but win»: he saw
Hippwleidex boating
time with his legs‘, he
could bear 1'! no longer.
“Sari nf Tiyamler. "
he
CI‘i.(’d, “you have
dancer! away your
nmxriagr.
"
'IIHiHL\"!UR1i-'5.
HY-:li()l)(>1’L'S.
Fll")‘H (T.'\"! may or.
LAW :54
288 LAW 34
Haile Selassie, ruler ofEthiopia for forty or so years beginning in 1930,
was once a
young man named Lij Tafari. He came from a noble family, but
there was no real chance of him coming to power, for he was far down the
line of succession from the king then on the throne, Menelik II. Nevertheless, from an early age he exhibited a self~coufidence and a
royal bearing
that surprised everyone around him.
At the age of fourteen, Tafari went to live at the court, where he imme—
diately impressed Menelik and became his favorite. Tafarfs grace under
fire, his patience, and his calm selflassurance fascinated the king. The other
young nobles, arrogant, blustery, and envious, would push this slight,
bookish teenager around. But he never got angry-—-that would have been a
sign of insecurity, to which he would not stoop. There were already people
around him who felt he would someday rise to the top, for he acted as ifhe
were already there.
Years later, in 1936, when the Italian Fascists had taken over Ethiopia
and Tafari, now called Haile Selassie, was in exile, he addressed the League
of Nations to plead his country’s case. The Italians in the audience heckled
him with vulgar abuse, but he maintained his dignified pose, as if completely unaffected. This elevated him while making his opponents look
even uglier. Dignity, in fact, is invariably the mask to assume under difficult
circumstances: It is as if nothing can affect you, and you have all the time
in the world to respond. This is an extremely powerful pose.
A royal demeanor has other uses. Con artists have long known the
value of an aristocratic front; it either disazms people and makes them less
suspicious, or else it intimidates them and puts them on the defensive———and
as Count Victor Lustig knew, once you put a sucker on the defensive he is
doomed. The con man Yellow Kid Well, too, would often assume the trap
pings of a man of wealth, along with the nonchalance that goes with them.
Alluding to some magical method of making money, he would stand aloof,
like a king, exuding confidence as if he really were fabulously rich. The
suckers would beg to be in on the con, to have a chance at the wealth that
he so clearly displayed.
Finally, to reinforce the inner psychological tricks involved in projecting a
royal demeanor, there are outward strategies to help you create the
effect. First, the Columbus Strategy: Always make a bold demand. Set your
price high and do not waver. Second, in a dignified way, go after the highest person in the building. This immediately puts you on the same plane as
the chief executive you are attacking. It is the David and Goliath Strategy:
By choosing a great opponent, you create the appearance of greatness.
Third, give a gift of some sort to those above you. This is the strategy
ofthose who have a patron: By giving your patron a gift, you are essentially
saying that the two of you are equal. It is the old con game ofgiving so that
you can take. When the Renaissance writer Pietro Aretino wanted the
Duke of Mantua as his nerd patron, he knew that if he was slavish and
sycophantic, the duke would think him unworthy; so he approached the
duke with gifts, in this case paintings by the wn‘ter’s good friend Titian.
Accepting the gifts created a kind of equality between duke and writer: The
duke was put at ease by the feeling that he was dealing with a man of his
own aristocratic stamp. He funded Aretino generously. The gift strategy is
subtle and brilliant because you do not beg: You ask for help in a dignified
way that implies equality between two people, one of whom just happens
to have more money.
Remember: It is up to you to set your own price. As}: for less and that
is just what you will get Ask for more, however, and you send a signal that
you are worth a king’s ransom. Even those who turn you down respect you
for your confidence, and that respect will eventually pay off in ways you
cannot imagine.
Image: The Crown. Place it upon your head
and you assume a different pose——tranqui1
yet radiating assurance. Never show
doubt, never lose your dignity beneath
the crown, or it will not fit. It will seem
to be destined for one more worthy. Do
not wait for a coronation; the great»
est emperors crown themselves.
Authority: Everyone should be royal after his own fashion. Let all your
actions, even though they are not those of a king, be, in their own
sphere, worthy of one. BC sublime in your deeds, lofty in your
thoughts; and in all your doings Show that you deserve to be a king
even though you are not one in reality. (Baltasar Gracizin, l60l~lC>58)
LAW 34 289
290 LAW 34
REV ERSAL
The idea behind the assumption of regal confidence is to set yourself apart
from other people, but if you take this too far it will be your undoing.
Never make the mistake of thinking that you elevate yourself by humiliating people. Also, it is never a good idea to loom too high above the
crowcl—you make an easy target. And there are times when an aristocratic
pose is eminently dangerous.
Charles I, king of England during the 16405, faced a profound public
disenchantment with the institution of monarchy. Revolts erupted through»
out the country, led by Oliver Cromwell. Had Charles reacted to the times
with insight, supporting reforms and making a show of sacrificing some of
his power, history might have been different. Instead he reverted to an
even more regal pose, seeming outraged by the assault on his power and
on the divine institution of monarchy. His stiff kingliness offended people
and spurred on their revolts. And eventually Charles lost his head, literally
Understand: You are radiating confidence, not arrogance or disdain.
Finally, it is true that you can sometimes find some power through affecting a kind of earthy vulgarity, which will prove amusing by its extremeness. But to the extent that you win this game by going beyond the limits,
separating yourself from other people by appearing even more vulgar than
they are, the game is dangerous: There will always be people more vulgar
than you, and you will easily be replaced the following season by someone
younger and worse.
LAW
35
MASTER THE ART
OF TIMING
‘JUDGMENT
Never seem to be in a hurrjv——h'wr1ying betrays a lack of
control aver yourselfi and over time. Always seem fratient, as 2]" you know that everything will come to you
eventually. Become a detective ofthe right moment; snijj’
out the spirit cflhe limes, tke tmnak that will sang; you to
power. Leam to stand back when the time is not yet ripe,
and to smkefiercely when it has reachedfmition.
291
.-l}R'H>l{ll l I-‘:~~;4>\
S(’IN)VIlL\' ‘K strmgtlt wax
now Itlpltlly tm~reast'rt,q,
for all the tribes
lretweeh. the Ebro imr)
the I’yrt*nec.\' (It/lint’ over
to his Sllle, and troops
<'urm:jlncltt'rtg rluily to
join him from every
quarter. /it the sunte
time’ he was troubled
by the luck ofdisciplttte
and the ()V(’VCl)I’Z/ldfllltft’
aftlimér newly arrived
lmrhttrium. who would
slxrmt at him tn atturk
the erterny and had no
paticnte with his tlolttyu
mg luL‘l'lC.\', and he
Ih(?t'(f_ltH‘(‘, tried to win
them (IVCY by tlrgtumvlt.
But wlwn he saw that
they were dixcrmterttcd
and pt’V.\‘i.\It’tl in prenim; their (Iernantls
regurtllen of the
(‘lrt’tlm.\‘l(,lt'll.’£’.,\’, he let
them have their way
and alltrvwtl them to
engage the L-rmny; he
hopml that they would
suffer 4! severe defeat
without htetng
ttotitpletcly crushvd,
and that this would
malcr tlzrm better
di.\'p0.\'ed to obey his
orttcrs in j't¢turz*,
The event turned Uut as
he exporter! and St-r‘tu—
rius ctzrrw to llllflt
Vcflflll’. provirlrccl a
rallying point for the
[llglllH‘.&‘, and led them
safely brick in his
('tmtp. Hi.\‘ rzextstcp was
to revive tltcir (le;'t*cIm'l
spirits, amt so at few
days later ho
summoned [I general
a.\‘,\’(',ml)l}‘. BC_l(Irtf it he
produced two ltrtrsex,
one o/"them old and
(‘Ilfl‘t’hl£’ll, the ntlwr
large and lusty tlrlll
292 LAW 3 5
OBSERVAN CE OF THE LAW
Starting out in life as a nondescript French seminary-school teacher, Joseph
Fouché wandered from town to town for most of the decade of the 17805,
teaching mathematics to young boys. Yet he never completely committed
himself to the church, never took his vows as a pn'est—he had bigger plans.
Patiently waiting for his chance, he kept his options open. And when the
French Revolution broke out, in 1789, Fouché waited no longer: He got rid
of his cassock, grew his hair long, and became a
revolutionary. For this was
the spirit of the times. To miss the boat at this critical moment could have
spelt disaster. Fouché did not miss the boat: Befriending the revolutionary
leader Robespierre, he quickly rose in the rebel ranks. In 1792 the town of
Nantes elected Fouché to be its representative to the National Convention
(created that year to frame a new constitution for a French republic).
When Fouché arrived in Paris to take his seat at the convention, a violent rift had broken out between the moderates and the radical Jacobins.
Fouché sensed that in the long run neither side would emerge victorious.
Power rarely ends up in the hands of those who start a
revolution, or even
of those who further it; power sticks to those who bring it to a conclusion.
That was the side Fouché wanted to be on.
His sense of timing was uncanny. He started as a moderate, for moderv
ates were in the majority. When the time came to decide on whether or not
to execute Louis XVI, however, he saw that the people were clamoring for
the king’s head, so he cast the deciding vote~—for the guillotine. Now he
had become a radical. Yet as tensions came to the boil in Paris, he foresaw
the danger of being too closely associated with any one faction, so he accepted a position in the provinces, where he could lie low for a while. A
few months later he was assigned to the post of proconsul in Lyons, where
he oversaw the execution of dozens of aristocrats. At a certain moment,
however, he called a halt to the killings, sensing that the mood of the counny was turning—and despite the blood already on his hands, the citizens of
Lyons hailed him as a savior from what had become known as the Terror.
So far Fouché had played his cards brilliantly, but in 1794 his old
friend Robespierre recalled him to Paris to account for his actions in Lyons.
Robespierre had been the driving force behind the Terror. He had sent
heads on both the right and the left rolling, and Fouché, whom he no
longer trusted, seemed destined to provide the next head. Over the next
few weeks, a tense struggle ensued: While Robespierre railed openly
against Fouché, accusing of him dangerous ambitions and calling for his ar»
rest, the crafty Fouché worked more indirectly, quietly gaining support
among those who were beginning to tire of Robespierre’s dictatorial control. Fouché was playing for time. He knew that the longer he survived, the
more disaffected citizens he could rally against Robespierre. He had to
have broad support before he moved against the powerful leader. He rallied support among both the moderates and the jacobins, playing on the
widespread fear of Robespierre-—everyone was afraid of being the next to
go to the guillotine. It all came to fruition on July 27: The convention
turned against Robespierre, shouting down his usual lengthy speech. He
was quickly arrested, and a few days later it was Robespierre’s head, not
Fouché’s, that fell ‘into the basket.
Wlhen Fouché returned to the convention after Robespien-e’s death, he
played his most unexpected move: Having led the conspiracy against
Robespierre, he was expected to sit with the moderates, but lo and behold,
he once again changed sides, joining the radical Jacobins. For perhaps the
first time in his life he aligned himself with the minority. Clearly he sensed
a reaction stirring: He knew that the moderate faction that had executed
Robespierre, and was now about to take power, would initiate a new round
of the Terror, this time against the radicals. In siding with the jacobins,
then, Fouché was sitting with the martyrs of the days to eome—the people
who would be considered blameless in the troubles that were on their way.
Taking sides with what was about to become the losing team was a
risky
gambit, of course, but Fouché must have calculated he could keep his head
long enough to quietly stir up the populace against the moderates and
watch them fall from power. And indeed, although the moderates did call
for his arrest in December of 1795, and would have sent him to the guillo~
line, too much time had passed. The executions had become unpopular
with the people, and Fouché survived the swing of the pendulum one more
time.
A new government took over, the Directoire. It was not, however, a
jacobin government, but a moderate one-———more moderate than the gov‘
emment that had reimposed the Terror. Fouché, the radical, had kept his
head, but now he had to keep a low profile. He waited patiently on the
sidelines for several years, allowing time to soften any bitter feelings
against him, then he approached the Directoire and convinced them he
had a new passion: intelligencegathering. He became a paid spy for the
government, excelled at the job, and in 1799 was rewarded by being made
minister of police. Now he was not just empowered but required to extend
his spying to every corner of Fra.nce—-~a responsibility that would greatly
reinforce his natural ability to sniff out where the wind was blowing. One
of the first social trends he detected, in fact, came in the person of
Napoleon, a brash young general whose destiny he right away saw was entwined with the future of France. When Napoleon unleashed a
coup d’état,
on November 9, 1799, Fouché pretended to be asleep. Indeed he slept the
whole day. For this indirect assistance-«it might have been thought his job,
after all, to prevent a military coup-—Napoleou kept him on as minister of
police in the new regime.
Over the next few years, Napoleon came to rely on Fcmché more and
more. He even gave this former revolutionary a title, duke of Otranto, and
rewarded him with great wealth. By 1808, however, Fouché, always attuned to the times, sensed that Napoleon was on the downswing. His futile
war with Spain, a
country that posed no threat to France, was a sign that he
was losing a sense of proportion. Never one to be caught on a sinking ship,
Fouché conspired with Talleyrand to bring about Napoleon’s downfall. Al—
possesxing a
flowing
mil, which was remarkable for the thickness
and baauqv ofits flair.
By the sirlc ofthe weak
Item: slood a tall
jrrrmg man. and by theride of the povmrful
horse a short man of
mmn plxyslqne. At 1:
xignal rim strong man
seized the mil afhii
horse and tried with all
his .$'lYE’fl[{[]l to pull it
inwards him, as if 10
tear it of}: while the
weak man began I!)
pull [he hairs one by
one from the tail of the
strong lim-sr.e.
The strong man, after
tugging with ull his
might to no purpose
and (‘during the spectaIwas‘ it great deal of
amusmzwnl in the
protresmfirlully gave up
tlw attempt, while the
weak man quirkly and
with very little trouble
.3‘!l‘l[Ip¢’¢l his hr_vrse’s tail
(romp/elely bare. There
.S'm‘t(>rizl.r rate to his
feet and said, “Now
you can 381’. nay‘ friemis’
and allies. (I111! perseverance is more effrc»
rive I/mu hrulc strength,
and that (here are many
difficulllex thul (armor
be overcome ifyou try
10 do mmrything at
once. but which will
yield lfyuu master
them little by little. The
truth is that a steady
continu0u.\' effort is
irresistible, for this is
the way in. which Time
captures and sarbdrms
the grremesz powers on
eanh. Now Time, you
yhaultl remmwer, is a
good friend and ally I0
tli().s'z,' who use their
liztelliglance In C/10().$'(€
the right moment. but a
marl dangerous enemy
LAW 35 293
to thosze wlm rush int!)
action at the wrong
(me.
"
LIFE or SERTORIUS.
PLLTARCH.
c A1). 46-120
Mr. S/iih had two sons:
om: loved lreumi1zg.‘tIiv
othrr war. Thefirst
cxpourided his mom!
teachings at the
rttlnziring court of Ch ’i
and was made a tutor.
while the second talked
strategy at the helli('o.\*e
court of Ch ":4 and was
made it gerwriii. '1'/te
impecuniour Mr. Mcng,
lwrtring nftharié
successes, sent his own
two .S‘!)lL\‘ out to follow
thc example of tin’
Shih bays. Thejirst
expmmdcd his mom]
tmching.s' at the mm‘!
afCh’a'rz, but the King
of C/fin will.’ “At
present flu: states are
quarrr,-ling violently
and everyv prince is
busy arming his troops
to the teeth. If I
followed this prigir
pratings WK’ .\‘lH)Lil(l
soon be annihilated."
So he had the fellow
castrated. Meanwhile.
the .im'0nrl bmtlurr
tiispliiyezl his military
genius at the court of
Wci. But thn King of
Wei said: “llrlirze is :1
weak riatra. l/‘I ftfliell
on farce imzeati of
dzplormtcy, we rlzould
soon be wiped out. If,"
on ilw mlicr hand, I let
this fire-eater go, hr
will offer his .\'ervice:; to
another start: and than
294 LAW 35
though the conspiracy failed—Talleyrand was fired; Fouché stayed, but
was kept on a
tight leash—it publicized a growing discontent with the emperor, who seemed to be losing control. By 1814 Napoleon’s power had
crumbled and allied forces finally conquered him.
The next government was a restoration of the monarchy, in the form
of King Louis XVIII, brother of Louis XVI. Fouché, his nose always sniffing the air for the next social shift, knew Louis would not last long—he had
none ofNapoleon's flair. Fouché once again played his waiting game, lying
low, staying away from the spotlight. Sure enough, in February of 1815,
Napoleon escaped from the island ofElba, where he had been imprisoned.
Louis XVIII panicked: His policies had alienated the citizenry, who were
clamoring for Nap0leon’s return. So Louis turned to the one man who
could maybe have saved his hide, Fouché, the former radical who had sent
his brother, Louis XVI, to the guillotine, but was now one of the most popular and widely admired politicians in France. Fouché, however, would not
side with a loser: He refused Louis’s request for help by pretending that his
help was unnecessaiy—by swearing that Napoleon would never return
to power (although he knew otherwise). A short time later, of course,
Napoleon and his new citizen army were closing in on Paris.
Seeing his reign about to collapse, feeling that Fouché had betrayed
him, and certain that he did not want this powerful and able man on
Napoleon’s team, King Louis ordered the Ini.n.ister’s arrest and execution.
On March 16, 1815, policemen surrounded Fouché’s coach on a Paris
boulevard. Was this finally his end? Perhaps, but not immediately: Fouché
told the police that an exvmember of government could not be arrested on
the street. They fell for the story and allowed him to retum home. Later
that day, though, they came to his house and once again declared him
under arrest. Fouché nodded—but would the officers be so kind as allow a
gentleman to wash and to change his clothes before leaving his house for
the last time? They gave their permission, Fouché left the room, and the
minutes went by. Fouché did not return. Finally the policemen went into
the next room—where they saw a ladder against an open window, leading
down to the garden below.
That day and the next the police combed Paris for Fouché, but by then
Napoleon’s cannons were audible in the distance and the king and all the
king’s men had to flee the city. As soon as Napoleon entered Paris, Fouché
came out of hiding. He had cheated the executioner once again. Napoleon
greeted his former minister of police and gladly restored him to his old
post. During the 100 days that Napoleon remained in power, until Waterloo, it was essentially Fouché who governed France. Alter Napoleon fell,
Louis XVIII returned to the throne, and like a cat with nine lives, Fouché
stayed on to serve in yet another goVemment—by then his power and influence had grown so great that not even the king dared challenge him.
Interpretation
In a period of unprecedented turmoil, Joseph Fouché thrived through his
mastery of the art of timing. He teaches us a number of key lessons.
First, it is critical to recognize the spirit of the times. Fouché always
looked two steps ahead, found the wave that would carry him to power,
and rode it. You must always work with the times, anticipate twists and
turns, and never miss the boat. Sometimes the spirit of the times is obscure:
Recognize it not by what is loudest and most obvious in it, but by what lies
hidden and dormant. Look forward to die Napoleons of the future rather
than holding on to the ruins of the past.
Second, recognizing the prevailing winds does not necessarily mean
running with them. Any potent social movement creates a powerful reaction, and it is wise to anticipate what that reaction will be, as Fouché did
after the execution of Robespierre. Rather than ride the cresting wave of
the moment, wait for the tide’s ebb to carry you back to power. Upon occa~
sion bet on the reaction that is brewing, and place yourself in the vanguard
of it.
Finally, Fouché had remarkable patience. Without patience as your
sword and shield, your timing will fail and you will inevitably find yourself
aloser. When the times were against Fouché, he did not struggle, get emotional, or strike out rashly. He kept his cool and maintained a low profile,
patiently building support among the citizenry, the bulwark in his next rise
to power. Whenever he found himself in the weaker position, he played for
time, which he knew would always be his ally if he was patient. Recognize
the moment, then, to hide in the grass or slither under a rock, as well as the
moment to bare your fangs and attack.
Space we can recover, time never.
N:1;tmle07: Bomzpanle, 1 769-1821
KEYS TO POWER
Time is an artificial concept that we ourselves have created to make the
limitlessness of eternity and the universe more bearable, more human.
Since we have constructed the concept of time, we are also able to mold it
to some degree, to play tricks with it. The time of a child is long and slow,
with vast expanses; the time of an adult whizzes by frighteningly fast.
Time, then, depends on perception, which, we know, can be willfully altered. This is the first thing to understand in mastering the art of timing. If
the inner turmoil caused by our emotions tends to make time move faster,
it follows that once we control our emotional responses to events, time will
move much more slowly. This altered way of dealing with things tends to
lengthen our perception of future time, opens up possibilities that fear and
anger close off, and allows us the patience that is the principal requirement
in the art of timing.
There are three kinds of time for us to deal with; each presents problems that can be solved with skill and practice. First there is long time: the
drawn»out, years—long kind of time that must be managed with patience
and gentle guidance. Our handling of long time should be mostly defensive—this is the art of not reacting impulsively, of waiting for opportunity.
we shall be in trouble. ”
So he’ had the fellows
feet on! off B0111 farm‘-
lies did exa(‘tl_y lhc
same thing, but one
timer! it right, the other
wrong. Thus ,\'uC(:(2.r.s'
depends on . . .
rhythm.
Lit}-1 T71
rm; cu .
GLASS.
DENNIS Bi.o0owoR'rH,
1967
ll.0'l‘l—'.l) lN
. L LOOKING
The sullan /of Persia]
had sentenced two men
to death. One of /hem,
knowing how much the
Sltltflll loved his rm]-
lizm, offered to teach
the home to fly within a
year in return for his
life. The sulmn,fancy—
mg /zirn.s*el/‘as the ridcr
of the 0f1lyfl_YlI1g horse
in Ihe world, agreed,
The other prisoner
looked at his friend in
disbelief “You know
horses don ‘rfly. What
made you come up
with 4: crazy idea likc
that? You‘re only post—
porting Ihc inevitable."
“Not So," Xllill the /first
prisoner]. "I have acmally given myselffaur
chances forfreedom.
First, the sultan might
die rlurmg the year.
Second, I might die.
Third, the horse might
rlie.AnrlfourIh . , . I
might teach the horse
Io,/ly!"
[HE CRAFI‘ or-‘ POWER.
R. G. H. Sim,
1979
LAW 35 295
Till‘, l'Ri?l"l' KM)
HIE (Ll §§€.'l~i(),\
A ftlvlwrmmz in the
month of May .r(tmcl
angltng on the bank of
(Int Tltames with rm
arr!/lcitzlfly. He threw
his bail with so Inuch
an, that 4: young rmm
wax rurftmg ruwrzm’ it,
when she was
prevetztzrl by hm‘
tmvrhrr. “Navcr. "mid
rile, “my chtld, be too
precipitate, when: there
ix ll po.r.\'t'bili(_v of
danger. Take due Itme
to consider, ltefore you
risk an action aim: ntny
tie/"am! How know
you whether yon
tlppmtlailcz’ hr imlr.-ed a
fly. or Ihte snare ofan
unetny? Let someone
else make the expert?
mm: before you. Ifit
be u/i’)=, he will very
p!‘()b(£[71}' elude the fin:
tzlmck: and the Secottd
may be made, iftmt
with sitccesx. at least
with .st1fe1y."
Shit had no stmmtr spolmn,1hmz a gttdgeon
suizecl the pretended
fly. and becmne mt
exanxplc to the giddy
tlaughrer oflhe importance of her mother":
counsel.
r/xnuas.
ROBERT Donsmv.
1'/tl3—l 764
Next there is fimed time: the short—term time that we can manipulate as an
offensive weapon, upsetting the timing of our opponents. Finally there is
end lime, when a plan must be executed with speed and force. We have
waited, found the moment, and must not hesitate.
Long Time. The famous seventeenth-century Ming painter Chou Yung
relates a story that altered his behavior forever. Late one winter afternoon
he set out to visit a town that lay across the river from his own town. He
was bringing some important books and papers with him and had commissioned a
young boy to help him carry them. As the ferry neared the other
side of the river, Chou Yung asked the boatman ifthey would have time to
get to the town before its gates closed, since it was a mile away and night
was approaching. The boatman glanced at the boy, and at the bundle of
loosely tied papers and books-“Yes,” he replied, “if you do not walk too
fast.”
As they started out, however, the sun was setting. Afraid of being
locked out of the town at night, prey to local bandits, Chou and the boy
walked faster and faster, finally breaking into a run. Suddenly the string
around the papers broke and the documents scattered on the ground. It
took them many minutes to put the packet together again, and by the time
they had reached the city gates, it was too late.
When you force the pace out of fear and impatience, you create a nest
of problems that require fixing, and you end up taking much longer than if
you had taken your time. Hurriers may occasionally get there quicker, but
papers fly everywhere, new dangers arise, and they find themselves in constant crisis mode, fixing the problems that they themselves have created.
Sometimes not acting in the face of danger is your best move»-you wait,
you deliberately slow down. As time passes it will eventually present op
portunities you had not imagined.
Waiting involves controlling not only your own emotions but those of
your colleagues, who, mistaking acfion for power, may try to push you into
making rash moves. In your rivals, on the other hand, you can encourage
this same mistake: If you let them rush headlong into trouble while you
stand back and wait, you will soon find ripe moments to intervene and pick
up the pieces. This wise policy was the principal strategy of the great earlyseventeenthcentury emperor Tokugawa Ieyasu ofjapan. When his prede~
cessor, the headstrong Hideyoshi, whom he served as 3. general, staged a
rash invasion of Korea, leyasu did not involve himself. He knew the invasion would be a disaster and would lead to Hideyoshfs downfall, Better to
stand patiently on the sidelines, even fin many years, and then be in position
to seize power when the time is rightmexactly what Ieyasu did, with great
anistry.
You do not deliberately slow time down to live longer, or to take more
pleasure in the moment, but the better to play the game of power. First,
when your mind is uncluttered by constant emergencies you will see fur»
ther into the future. Second, you will be able to resist the baits that people
dangle in front of you, and will keep yourself from becoming another im~
patient sucker. Third, you will have more room to be flexible. Opportunities will inevitably arise that you had not expected and would have missed
had you forced the pace. Fourth, you will not move from one deal to the
next without completing the first one. To build your power’s foundation
can take years; make sure that foundation is secure. Do not be a flash in the
pan—-«success that is built up slowly and surely is the only kind that lasts.
Finally, slowing time down will give you a perspective on the times
you live in, letting you take a certain distance and putting you in a less
emotionally charged position to see the shapes of things to come. Hurriers
will often mistake surface phenomena for a real trend, seeing only what
they want to see. How much better to see what is really happening, even if
it is unpleasant or makes your task harder.
Forced Time. The trick in forcing time is to upset the timing of others-——t0
make them hurry, to make them wait, to make them abandon their own
pace, to distort their perception of time. By upsetting the timing of your op~
ponent while you stay patient, you open up time for yourself, which is half
the game.
In 1473 the great Turkish sultan Mehmed the Conqueror invited negotiations with Hungary to end the elf-andam war the two countries had
waged for years. When the Hungarian emissary arrived in Turkey to start
the talks, Turkish officials humbly apologized——Mehmed had just left Istanbul, the capital, to battle his longtime foe, Uzun Hasan. But he urgently
wanted peace with Hungary, and had asked that the emissary join him at
the front.
When the emissary anived at the site of the fighting, Mehmed had already left it, moving eastward in pursuit of his swift foe. This happened
several times. Wherever the emissary stopped, the Thrks lavished gifts and
banquets on him, in pleasurable but timeconsuming ceremonies. Finally
Mehrned defeated Uzun and met with the emissary. Yet his terms for peace
with Hungary were excessively harsh. After a few days, the negotiations
ended, and the usual stalemate remained in place. But this was fine with
Mehmecl. In fact he had planned it that way all along: Plotting his campaign against Uzun, he had seen that diverting his armies to the east would
leave his western flank vulnerable. To prevent Hungary from taking advan»
tage of his weakness and his preoccupation elsewhere, he flrst dangled the
lure of peace before his enemy, then made them wait»-all on his own
terms.
Making people wait is a powerful way of forcing time, as long as they
do not figure out what you are up to. You control the clock, they linger in
limbowand rapidly come unglued, opening up opportunities for you to
strike. The opposite effect is equally powerful: You make your opponents
hurry. Start off your dealings with them slowly, then suddenly apply pressure, making them feel that everything is happening at once. People who
lack the time to think will make mistakes-—so set their deadlines for them.
298 LAW 3.1
This was the technique Machiavelli admired in Cesare Borgia, who, during
negotiations, would suddenly press vehemently for a decision, upsetting
his opponent’s timing and patience. For who would dare make Cesare
wait?
Joseph Duveen, the famous art dealer, knew that if he gave an indecisive buyer like John D. Rockefeller a deadline»-the painting had to leave
the country, another tycoon was interested in it—the client would buy just
in time. Freud noticed that patients who had spent years in psychoanalysis
without improvement would miraculously recoverjust in time if he fixed a
definite date for the end of the therapy. Jacques Lacan, the famous French
psychoanalyst, used a variation on this tactic—he would sometimes end
the customary hour session of therapy after only ten minutes, without
warning. After this happened several times, the patient would realize that
he had better make maximum use ofthe time, rather than wasting much of
the hour with a lot of talk that meant nothing. The deadline, then, is a
powerful tool. Close off the vistas of indecision and force people to make up
their damn minds or get to the point—never let them make you play on
their excruciating terms. Never give them time.
Magicians and showmen are experts in forcing time. Houdini could
often wriggle free of handcuffs in minutes, but he would draw the escape
out to an hour, making the audience sweat, as time came to an apparent
standstill. Magicians have always known that the best way to alter our petception of time is often to slow down the pace. Creating suspense brings
time to a
terrifying pause: The slower the magician’s hands move, the easier it is to create the illusion of speed, making people think the rabbit has
appeared instantaneously. The great nineteenthcentury magician _]ean—Eu—
gene Robert~Houdin took explicit notice of this effect: “The more slowly a
story is told,” he said, “the shorter it seems.”
Going slower also makes wha). you are doing more interesting»-the
audience yields to your pace, becomes entranced. It is a state in which time
whizzes delightfully by. You must practice such illusions, which share in the
hypnotisfs power to alter perceptions of time.
End Time. You can play the game with the utmost artistry—--waiting patiently for the right moment to act, putting your competitors off their form
by messing with their timing~—-but it won’t mean a
thing unless you know
how to finish. Do not be one of those people who look like paragons of pa«
tieuce but are actually just afraid to bring things to a close: Patience is
worthless unless combined with a willingness to fall ruthlessly on your opponent at the right moment. You can wait as long as necessary for the con
clusion to come, but when it comes it must come quickly. Use speed to
paralyze your opponent, cover up any mistakes you might make, and impress people with your aura ofauthority and finality.
With the patience of a snake charmer, you draw the snake out with
calm and steady rhythms. Once the snake is out, though, would you dangle
your foot above its deadly head? There is never a good reason to allow the
slightest hitch in your endgame. Your mastery of timing can really only be
judged by how you work with end time——-how you quickly change the pace
and bring things to a swift and definitive conclusion.
Image: The Hawk. Patiently and silently it circles the sky, high
above, allxseeing with its powerful eyes. Those below have
no awareness that they are being tracked. Suddenly,
when the moment arrives, the hawk swoops
down with a speed that cannot be de
fancied against; before its prey
knows what has happened,
the bird‘s viselike talons
have carried it
up into the
sky.
Authority: There is a tide in the affairs of men, /Which, taken at the flood,
leads on to fortune; I’ Omitted, all the voyage of their life / Is bound in
shallows and in miseries. (julius Caesar, William Shakespeare, 1564-1616)
REVERSAL
There is no power to be gained in letting go of the reins and adapting to
whatever time brings. To some degree you must guide time or you will be
its merciless Victim. There is accordingly no reversal to this law.
LAW’ 51 5 .900
300
36
DISDAIN THINGS
YOU CANNOT HAVE:
IGNORING THEM IS
THE BEST REVENGE
_]UDGMEN'I‘
By acknowledging a petty problem you give it existence
and credibility. The meme altentirm you pay an enemy,
the stronger you make him; and a small mistake is often
made worse and more visible when you try tofiic it. It is
sometimes best to leave things alone. Ifthere is something
you want but cannot have, show mntemptfai it. The less
interest you reveal, the more supenbryou seem.
TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW
The Mexican rebel leader Pancho Villa started out as the chief of a
gang of
bandits, but after revolution broke out in Mexico in 1910, he became a.
kind of folk hero—robbing trains and giving the money to the poor, lead
ing daring raids, and charming the ladies with romantic escapades. His exploits fascinated Americans—he seemed a man from another era, part
Robin Hood, part Don Juan. After a few years of bitter fighting, however,
General Carranza emerged as the victor in the Revolution; the defeated
Villa and his troops went back home, to the northern state of Chihuahua.
His army dwindled and he turned to banditry again, damaging his popularity. Finally, perhaps out of desperation, he began to rail against the
United States, the gringos, whom he blamed for his troubles.
In March of 1916, Pancho Villa raided Columbus, New Mexico. Ram»
paging through the town, he and his gang killed seventeen American soldiers and civilians. President Woodrow Wilson, like many Americans, had
admired Villa; now, however, the bandit needed to be punished. Wilson’s
advisers urged him to send troops into Mexico to capture Villa. For a
power as large as the United States, they argued, not to strike back at an
army that had invaded its territory would send the worst kind of signal.
Furthermore, they continued, many Americans saw Wilson as a pacifist, a
principle the public doubted as a
response to violence; he needed to prove
his mettle and manliness by ordering the use of force.
The pressure on Wflson was strong, and before the month was out,
with the approval of the Carranza government, he sent an army of ten
thousand soldiers to capture Pancho Villa. The venture was called the
Punitive Expedition, and its leader was the dashing General john Pershing, who had defeated guerrillas in the Philippines and Native Americans
in the American Southwest. Certainly Pershing could find and overpower
Pancho Villa.
The Punitive Expedition became a sensational story, and carloads of
US. reporters followed Pershing into action. The campaign, they wrote,
would be a test of American power. The soldiers carried the latest in
weaponry, communicated by radio, and were supported by reconnaissance from the air.
In the first few months, the troops split up into small units to comb the
wilds of northern Mexico. The Americans offered a $50,000 rewmd for infonnation leading to Villa’s capture. But the Mexican people, who had
been disillusioned with Villa when he had returned to banditry, now idolized him for facing this mighty American army. They began to give Pershing false leads: Villa had been seen in this village, or in that mountain
hideaway, airplanes would be dispatched, troops would scurry after them,
and no one would ever see him. The wily bandit seemed to be always one
step ahead of the American military.
By the summer of that year, the expedition had swelled to 123,000
men. They suffered through the stultifying heat, the mosquitoes, the wild
terrain. Trudging over a
countryside in which they were already resented,
HI; I‘().‘\ :\.\I)
‘lllli tIR.r\l’l'..‘s'
/l starving fox . . .
saw :1 cluster
Of lurriour-looking
grapes ofpurplish.
luster
Dangling ubuve him an
a lrelliscvfrume.
He would have dearly
liked lhem for hir
lunch,
But when he tried and
failed to reach the
bunch:
“Ah well, it’s more than
likely the_v’re not
Sweet-
(load only for grew:
fools 1:) eat.’ "
Warn’! he wise to my
they were unripe
Rather than whine
and gripe?
FAELES.
JEAN DE LA F<)N'IAlNI€.
16214695
Once when G. K.
Fliesterronlr ecrmorrzic
views were abu.\'t'd in
prim by George
Bernard Shaw, his
friends waited in vain
for him to reply.
Htrtoriurz Hiluire
Belloc re-pmached him.
"My dear Bellov, "
Chesterton said, “I
have answerer! him.
To a man uf'§'huw's
wit, silence is [he one
unbearable reparlee.
"
ri-re LlT'l‘I.E, l$R()W.\'
BUOK ()1? AN!-,(‘I)()1
Cl.ll‘”l‘0N FAIHMAN, E17,,
1985
LAW 35 30]
'|H|. \~«i \.\|)
IHI: (.\|il)l.\«‘I.li
/In um‘ lldll ()II1‘(' by
some accident lost his
tail, which was (1 grievous ajflielion to him;
and he was every where
seeking :1/terit, being
fool enough /0 think he
could get it set on
again. He passed
through a meadow, and
afterwards go! into a
garden. The gardener
.Y€(’lllg him, and not
able to endure the
misehiefhe was doing
in trampling down his
plums, fell into a
violent rage, ran to the
u.i'.s‘, imd never sumding
on the (‘en*m0riy of a
pillory. out off both his
ears, and heal him out
ofthe ground. Thus the
ass. who henmanxid the
loss ofhis tail. was in
far greater ujflierion
when he raw himself
without ears.
FABLENZ
PILPAY.
INu1A,
FOURTH (‘ENTURY
llll‘. l'R<>l)|(.\r' U\'
Once, when the Tokudaijr HllIll.Y1(’l' of the
right was chief ofthe
iI7t[M.’rl{1l])()li(,‘é', he was
holding a meeting of
his staff at the middle
gale when an ax
belonging to an official
nameilAkikane got
loose and wandered
into the ministry building. [I climbed up on
-302 LAW 36
they infuriated both the local people and the Mexican government. At one
point Pancho Villa hid in a mountain cave to recover from a. gunshot
wound he received in a skirmish with the Mexican army; looking down
from his aerie, he could watch Pershing lead the exhausted American
troops back and forth across the mountains, never getting any closer to
their goal.
All the way into winter, Villa played his cat-and—mouse game. Americans came to see the affair as a kind of slapstick fa,rce—in fact they began to
admire Villa again, respecting his resourcefulness in eluding a superior
force. In January of 1917, Wilson finally ordered Pershing’s withdrawal. As
the troops made their way back to American territory, rebel forces pursued
them, forcing the U.S. Army to use airplanes to protect its rear flanks. The
Punitive Expedition was being punished itself—it had turned into a retreat
of the most humiliating sort.
Interpretation
Woodrow Wilson organized the Punitive Expedition as a show of force: He
would teach Pancho Villa a lesson and in the process Show the world that
no one, large or small, could attack the mighty United States and get away
with it. The expedition would be over in a few weeks, and Villa would be
forgotten,
That was not how it played out. The longer the expedition took, the
more it focused attention on the Americans’ incompetence and on Villa’s
cleverness. Soon what was forgotten was not Villa but the raid that had
started it all. As a minor annoyance became an international embarrassment, and the enraged Americans dispatched more troops, the imbalance
between the size of the pursuer and the size of the pursued—who still managed to stay free—ma.de the affair a
joke. And in the end this white elephant of an army had to lumber out of Mexico, humiliated. The Punitive
Expedition did the opposite of what it set out to do: It left Villa not only
free but more popular than ever.
What could Wilson have done differently? He could have pressured
the Carranza government to catch Villa for him. Alternatively, since many
Mexicans had tired ofVilla before the Punitive Expedition began, he could
have worked quietly with them and won their support for a much smaller
raid to capture the bandit. He could have organized a
trap on the American side of die border, anticipating the next raid. Or he could have ignored
the matter altogether for the time being, waiting for the Mexicans themselves to do away with Villa of their own accord.
Remember: You choose to let things bother you. You can just as easily
choose not to notice the irritating offender, to consider the matter trivial
and unworthy of your interest That is the powerful move. What you do
not react to cannot drag you down in a futile engagement. Your pride is not
involved. The best lesson you can teach an irritating gnat is to consign it to
oblivion by ignoring it. Ifit is impossible to ignore (Pancho Villa had in fact
killed American citizens), then conspire in secret to do away with it, but
never inadvertently draw attention to the bothersome insect that will go
away or die on its own. If you waste time and energy in such entangle
ments, it is your own fault. Learn to play the card of disdain and turn your
back on what cannot harm you in the long run.
jusi thinkwit cast your government $130 million to try to get me. I took them
over rough, hilly country. Szrmetmwrforfifty miles at a stretch they had no water:
They had nothing but the sun and mosquitoes. . .And nothing was gainerl.
Ikmcfw Villa, 1878-1923
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
In the year 1527, King Henry VIII of England decided he had to find a
way to get rid ofhis wife, Catherine ofAragon. Catherine had failed to produce a son, a male heir who would ensure the continuance of his dynasty,
and Henry thought he knew why: He had read in the Bible the passage,
“And if a man shall take his brother’s wife, it is an unclean thing: he hath
uncovered his brother‘s nakedness; they shall be childless.” Before marry
ing Henry, Catherine had married his older brother Arthur, but Arthur
had died five months later. Henry had waited an appropriate time, then
had married his brother’s widow.
Catherine was the daughter of King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella of
Spain, and by marrying her Henry had kept alive a valuable alliance. Now,
however, Catherine had to assure him that her brief marriage with Arthur
had never been consummated. Otherwise Henry would view their relationship as incestuous and their marriage as null and void. Catherine insisted that she had remained a virgin through her marriage to Arthur, and
Pope Clement VII supported her by giving his blessing to the union, which
he could not have done had he considered it incestuous. Yet after years of
marriage to Henry, Catherine had failed to produce a son, and in the early
1520s she had entered menopause. To the king this could only mean one
thing: She had lied about her virginity, their union was incesmous, and
God had punished them.
There was another reason why Henry wanted to get rid of Catherine:
He had fallen in love with a
younger woman, Anne Boleyn. Not only was
he in love with her, but if he married her he could still hope to sire a
legitimate son. The marriage to Catherine had to be annulled. For this, however, Henry had to apply to the Vatican. But Pope Clement would never
annul the marriage,
By the summer of 1527, rumors spread throughout Europe that Henry
was about to attempt the impossible-—to annul his marriage against
Clement’s wishes. Catherine would never abdicate, let alone voluntarily
enter a
nunnery, as Henry had urged her. But Henry had his own strategy:
He stopped sleeping in the same bed with Catherine, since he considered
her his sister~in-law, not his lawful wife. He insisted on calling her Princess
the dais wlzexre the C/tie]
was Seated and hay
tltere, chewing its cud.
Ewrrylzne Wm‘ sure that
this was some grave
portem, and urged that
the ox be sent to a yinyrmg (liviner. Ilowe yer,
the prime minister. the
father ofrlxe minister of
the right, said, “An ox
has no dr‘_scrimr'uariorz.
It hm leg.r—-(here is
nowhere it won '1 go. it
does not make senor In
deprive rm unrlsrpuirl
a ma! afthe wretched
(1.: he needs in order I!)
attend court.
"
He
returned the we to its
owner and changed the
matting on which it had
Iain. N0 untoward
event ofany kind
occurrarl afterward.
'1‘hey.my that ifyou see
a prodigy and do not
near it as such, its character as a prodigy is
iiertroyed.
ESSAYS IN nn.i~m«:ssx
Kenko.
JAPAN,
mum:-zrwm camunv
LAW 36 303
Am] in this View it is
advimhle to let everyone
ofyaur (lL‘(.,'ulItIl1(1IlL‘t‘4
whether man or
wornan—frrel now and
than that you could
very well (lisprznse Wlill
zlmir company. This
will consolidate
friena'ship. Nuy. with
most people there will
be no harm in occasionally mixing at grain
ofdisdaln with your
rmatmem of tliomg that
will make them value
your friendship all the
mom. Chi non stima
vieu stimato, as a
subtle Italian proverb
has it— 10 (lismgard is
/0 win regard. But if we
really xhmk very highly
ofa person, we should
contract I! from him
like A: Crime. This is not
a
very gratifying thing
to do, but it is right.
Why. u (lug Will not
bear being treated (00
kindly, [(51 alrmre ll nmn!
ARTHUR
S(‘HL)|’l€‘~lllAlVI4R.
17884860
'l||l‘ \1(l’\K|l\’ .v\?\l)
‘rm-3 vr.\.<
A monkey was ctm‘_Ving two handfuls ul
peas. Our’ little pea
dropped out. He tried
to pick it up, and spill
twenty. He tried to pick
up the twmty. and spilt
them ull. Then he Iurt
his !<’Nl]7£'t‘, smtmred rim
peas in all directions.
and ran Away.
mores.
Ll.-‘U To1,s'roY.
l8Z8—l9l0
304 LAW 36
Dowager of Wales, her title as A.rthur’s widow. Finally, in 1531, he banished her from court and shipped her off to a distant castle. The pope or»
dared him to return her to court, on pain of excommunication, the most
severe penalty a Catholic could suffer. Henry not only ignored this threat,
he insisted that his marriage to Catherine had been dissolved, and in 1533
he married Anne Boleyn.
Clement refused to recognize the marriage, but Henry did not care.
He no longer recognized the pope‘s authority, and proceeded to break
with the Roman Catholic Church, establishing the Church of England in
its stead, with the king as the head of the new church. And so, not surprisingly, the newly formed Church ofEngland proclaimed Anne Boleyn England’s rightful queen.
The pope tried every threat in the book, but nothing worked. Henry
simply ignored him. Clement fumed—no one had ever treated him so contemptuously. Henry had humiliated him and he had no power of recourse.
Even excommunication (which he constantly threatened but never camed
out) would no longer matter.
Catherine too felt the devastating sting of Henry’s disdain. She tried to
fight back, but in appealing to Henry her words fell on deaf ears, and soon
they fell on no one’s. Isolated from the court, ignored by the king, mad
with anger and frustration, Catherine slowly deteriorated, and finally died
in January of 1536, from a cancerous tumor of the heart.
Interpretation
Vllhen you pay attention to a
person, the two of you become partners of
sorts, each moving in step to the actions and reactions of the other. In the
process you lose your initiative. It is a dynamic of all interactions: By acknowledging other people, even if only to fight with them, you open yourself to their influence. Had Henry locked horns with Catherine, he would
have found himself mired in endless arguments that would have weakened
his resolve and eventually worn him down. (Catherine was a
strong, stubbom woman.) Had he set out to convince Clement to change his verdict on
the marriages validity, or tried to compromise and negotiate with him, he
would have gotten bogged down in Clement’s favorite tactic: playing for
time, promising flexibility, but actually getting what popes always gottheir way.
Henry would have none of this. He played a devastating power
game——tota.l disdain. By ignoring people you cancel them out. This unset
tles and infuriates them—but since they have no dealings with you, there is
nothing they can do.
This is the offensive aspect of the law. Playing the card of contempt is
immensely powerful, for it lets you determine the conditions of the conflict.
The war is waged on your terms. This is the ultimate power pose: You are
the king, and you ignore what offends you. Watch how this tactic infuriates
people-—half of what they do is to get your attention, and when you withhold it from them, they flounder in fmstralzion.
MAN: Kick him.—Iae’l€forrg£ve you. Flatter him-~51: may or may not
see through you. But igrzore him and he 'll hate you.
Idries Shah, Caravan ol"Dreams. I968
KEYS TO POWER
Desire often creates paradoxical effects: The more you want something,
the more you chase after it, the more it eludes you. The more interest you
show, the more you repel the object of your desire. This is because your in«
terest is too su~ong—--it makes people awkward, even fearful. Uncontrollable desire makes you seem weak, unworthy, pathetic.
You need to turn your back on what you want. show your contempt
and disdain. This is the kind ofpowerful response that will drive your targets crazy. They will respond with a desire oftheir own, which is simply to
have an effect on you—perhaps to possess you, perhaps to hurt you. Ifthey
want to possess you, you have successfully completed the first step of seduction. Ifthey want to hurt you, you have unsettled them and made them
play by your rules (see Laws 8 and 39 on baiting people into action).
Contempt is the prerogative of the king. Where his eyes turn, what he
decides to see, is what has reality; what he ignores and turns his back on is
as good as dead. That was the weapon of King Louis XlV—-if he did not
like you, he acted as if you were not there, maintaining his superiority by
cutting off the dynamic of interaction. This is the power you have when
you play the card of contempt, periodically showing people that you can
do without them.
If choosing to ignore enhances your power, it follows that the opposite
approach-—commitment and engagement--ofien weakens you. By paying
undue attention to a
puny enemy, you look puny, and the longer it takes
you to crush such an enemy, the larger the enemy seems. When Athens set
out to conquer the island ofSicily, in 415 B.C., 3, giant power was attacking a
tiny one. Yet by entangling Athens in a
long—drawn—out conflict, Syracuse,
Sicily’s most important city-state, was able to grow in stature and confi»
dence. Finally defeating Athens, it made itself famous for centuries to
come. In recent times, President john F. Kennedy made a similar mistake
in his attitude to Fidel Castro of Cuba: His failed invasion at the Bay of
Pigs, in 1961, made Castro an international hero.
A second danger: If you succeed in crushing the irritant, or even ifyou
merely wound it, you create sympathy for the weaker side. Critics of
Franklin D. Roosevelt complained bitterly about the money his administration spent on government projects, but their attacks had no resonance
with the public, who saw the president as working to end the Great De~
pression. His opponents thought they had an example that would showjust
how wasteful he had become: his dog, Fala, which he lavished with favors
and attention. Critics railed at his insensifivitywspendmg taxpayers‘
money on a dog while so many Americans were still in poverty. But Roosevelt had a
response: How dare his critics attack a defenseless little dog?
As‘ some rrzake g()S.\‘.'{I
out of ever_va‘hing, so
others make much ado
about everything. They
am‘ always mlking big,
[and] lake tcvcryrhing
.verir)u.x'i'y, making (1
quarrel and a mystery
ofil. You should mke
wry few grievances tn
/mart‘ for to do so is to
gr‘ W yourselfgmzmat
less worry. I! is a mp5):-
Iurvy way ufbelzaving
to rake to hear! care-;
which you ought £0
throw over your shoal’
der. Man V 1}: ings which
scented imporiam [at
the rimrtj turn out in he
ofno rwrvuur what:
they are lg/lured; and
01/1!-r.\', whirh seem
trifling, appear formidable when you /my
rmenIx'r.m to tliem,
‘I'll/rig»: can wlxily be
settled at flu.’ olcfset, hm
not A!) later on. In
many miss, the rctnect‘_r
itself is Ihe cause of she
disease.‘ to 11'! rlzingx E3.’
is not the least saIi.r_{ac—
wry (lflifek rules:
BALMSAR GnA<‘iA~,
l 601 —
1658
LAW 36 305
306
'|'lllC ’\1l\'\ \\ll
H11‘ :~'|lr\l)()\\
There wax u cerium
original man who
desire!) to catch his
own shadow. He makes
a s'(¢>p or two toward it,
but it mover away from
him. He quickenr his
pare; it does the mine.
A: (as: he takes to
mrming; but the’
quicker he goes, Iltr
quicker mm the
.vhaa'ow aim, umarly
rrfusing to give itself‘
up, just as if it hail beer:
a treasure. But see.’ our
eccemriu friend
smidenly turns mumi.
and walks away from
it. And presently lie
looks behind him; now
me shadow f‘IN’l..S‘
ufier him.
I.arlie.rfair. I have
often ()h.verved . . . that
Forzunz: treaty us in 1!
Similar way. One mun
tries with I!” his might
to seize (he gotltlz.-23$
and only l().\’6.5 his lime
and his tmublu.
Annrhm .veen2.s'. In all
uppmruncc, to be
winning (ml of her
siglii; hug. no: she
l1:’r.u’lf mini: (1 piezzmre
in pm:vm'ng him.
r/\m.Ls.
lwm Kkimrr.
17684844
LAW 3!")
His speech in defense of Fala was one of the most popular he ever gave. In
this case, the weak party involved was the president’s dog and the attack
backfired-in the long run, it only made the president more sympathetic,
since many people will naturally side with the “underdog,” just as the
American public came to sympathize with the wily but outnumbered Pancho Villa.
It is tempting to want to fix our mistakes, but the harder we try, the
worse we often make them. It is sometimes more politic to leave them
alone. In 1971, when the New Ybrk limes published the Pentagon Papers, a
group of government documents about the history of US. involvement in
Indochina, Henry Kissinger erupted into a volcanic rage. Furious about the
Nixon administi-ation’s vulnerability to this kind of damaging leak, he
made recommendations that eventually led to the formation of a
group
called the Plumbers to plug the leaks. This was the unit that later broke into
Democratic Party offices in the Watergate Hotel, setting off the chain of
events that led to Nixon’s downfall. In reality the publication of the Pentagon Papers was not a serious threat to the administration, but Kissingefs
reaction made it a big deal. In trying to fix one problem, he created another: a paranoia for security that in the end was much more destructive to
the government. Had he ignored the Pentagon Papers, the scandal they
had created would eventually have blown over.
Instead of inadvertently focusing attention on a problem, making it
seem worse by publicizing how much concern and anxiety it is causing
you, it is ofien far wiser to play the contemptuous aristocrat, not deigning
to acknowledge the problem’s existence. There are several ways to execute
this strategy.
First there is the sour-grapes approach. If there is something you want
but that you realize you cannot have, the worst thing you can do is draw attention to your disappointment by complaining about it. An infinitely
more powerful tactic is to act as if it never really interested you in the first
place. When the writer George Sand’s supporters nominated her to be the
first female member of the Académie Frangaise, in 1861, Sand quickly saw
that the academy would never admit her. Instead of whining, though, she
claimed she had no interest in belonging to this group of worn—out, overrated, outAof—touch windbags. Her disdain was the perfect response: Had
she shown her anger at her exclusion, she would have revealed how much
it meant to her. Instead she branded the academy a club of old mem-and
why should she be angry or disappointed at not having to spend her time
with them? Crying “sour grapes” is sometimes seen as a reflection of the
weak; it is actually the tactic of the powerful.
Second, when you are attacked by an inferior, deflect people’s attention by making it clear that the attack has not even registered. Look away,
or answer sweetly, showing how little the attack concerns you. Similarly,
when you yourself have committed a blunder, the best response is often to
make less of your mistake by treating it lightly
The Japanese emperor Go-Saiin, a great disciple of the tea ceremony,
owned a priceless antique tea howl that all the coui-tiers envied. One day a
guest, Dainagon Tsunehiro. asked if he could carry the tea bowl into the
light, to examine it more closely. The bowl rarely left the table, but the emperor was in good spirits and he consented. As Dainagori carried the bowl
to the railing of the verandah, however, and held it up to the light, it
slipped from his hands and fell on a rock in the garden below, smashing
into tiny fragments.
The emperor of course was furious. “It was indeed most clumsy of me
to let it drop in this way,” said Dainagon, with a deep how, “but really
there is not much harm done. This ldo tea~bowl is a
very old one and it is
impossible to say how much longer it would have lasted, but anyhow it is
not a
thing of any public use, so I think it rather fortunate that it has broken
thus.” This surprising response had an immediate effect: The emperor
calmed down. Dainagon neither sniveled nor overapologized, but signaled
his own worth and power by treating his mistake with a touch of disdain.
The emperor had to respond with a similar aristocratic indifference; his
anger had made him seem low and petty——an image Dainagon was able to
manipulate.
Among equals this tactic might bacldire: Your indifference could make
you seem callous. But with a master, if you act quickly and without great
fuss, it can work to great effect: You bypass his angry response, save him
the time and energy he would waste by brooding over it, and allow him the
opportunity to display his own lack of pettiness publicly.
If we make excuses and denials when we are caught in a mistake or a
deception, we stir the waters and make the situation worse. It is ofien wiser
to play things the opposite way. The Renaissance writer Pietro Aretino
often boasted of his aristocratic lineage, which was, of course, a fiction,
since he was actually the son of a shoemaker. When an enemy of his finally
revealed the embarrassing truth, word quiddy spread, and soon all of
Venice (where he lived at the time) was aghast at Aretino’s lies. Had he
tried to defend himself, he would have only dragged himself down. His response was masterful: He announced that he was indeed the son of a shoemaker, but this only proved his greatness, since he had risen from the
lowest stratum of society to its very pinnacle. From then on he never mentioned his previous lie, trumpeting instead his new position on the matter
of his ancestry.
Remember: The powerful responses to niggling, petty annoyances and
irritations are contempt and disdain. Never show that something has affected you, or that you are offended——that only shows you have acknowledged a problem. Contempt is a dish that is best served cold and without
affectarion.
LAW 36 307
308 3 LAW 36
Image:
The Tiny
Wound.
It is small but painful and irritating. You
try all sorts of medicaments, you Cornplain, you scratch and pick at the scab.
Doctors only make it worse, transforming
the tiny wound into a
grave matter. If only
you had left the wound alone, letting time
heal it and freeing yourself of worry.
Authority: Know how to play the card of contempt. It is the most politic
kind of revenge. For there are many of whom we should have known
nothing if their distinguished opponents had taken no notice of them.
There is no revenge like oblivion, for it is the entombment of the unworthy in the dust of their own nothingness. (Baltasar Gracién, 1601-1658)
REVERSAL
You must play the card of contempt with care and delicacy. Most small
troubles will vanish on their own if you leave them be; but some will grow
and fester unless you attend to them. Ignore a
person ofinferior stature and
the next time you look he has become a serious rival, and your contempt
has made him vengeful as well. The geat princes of Renaissance Italy
chose to ignore Cesare Borgia at the outset of his career as a
young general
in the army of his father, Pope Alexander VI. By the time they paid a1ten~
tion it was too lat.e——the cub was now a lion, gobbling up chunks of Italy.
Often, then, while you show contempt publicly you will also need to keep
an eye on the problem privately, monitoring its status and making sure it
goes away. Do not let it become a cancerous cell.
Develop the skill of sensing problems when they are still small and
taking care of them before they become intractable. Leam to distinguish
between the potentially disastrous and the mildly irritating, the nuisance
that will quietly go away on its own. In either case, though, never com—
pletely take your eye oil" it. As long as it is alive it can smolder and spark
into life.
LAW
37
CREATE COMPELLING
SPECTACLES
JUDGMENT
Striking imagery and grand symbolic gestums create the
aura ofpower-—-—everycme responds to them. Stage spectcr
clesfar those zmnmd you, then, full of arrasting visuals
and radiant symbols that heighten your presence. Dazzled by appearancas, no one will mvlice tuba! you are
really drying.
‘
309
.\\'l‘U\\ \\.|) f l.!Il)l’\l'k\
She relied above all
upon her physical pms»
enre and the spell and
eurhmurnern which [I
wait! cream. . . . She
came sailing up the
rn-‘rr Cydrms in $1 barge
wirh a pimp 0f,L,'m'(1. its
purple sails billowing
in the wind. while her
rowers curesrcd the
water with arm‘ of
rilt-er whirrlt dippnl in
lime to the music of tho
flaw, in-cmiapmzied by
pipes and liner.
CIL’0}1alI(I herself
rcr liner! beneath it
rrannpy ofcioth of
gold. tlrerxuzd in Iht’
character ofAphmrlilf.
us‘ we see her In par!!!-
ings, while on eiiher
siaie In rr)m;rIe!c the
piCIurr' stool! boys‘
rusmnzcd ax Cupid;
who cu0I('a' her’ wirh
lherr farm Ireslem! of:1
crew the barge was
lined wilh 11:4’ m()sr
brzauliful ofhcr wailv
mg-women mtirml as
Nereids mm’ Graces,
came at the ruzms.-:5,
otizcrx or the lm-kie of
the mils, and all (he
while an irztir'sr:rrIhab[y
rid! perfume, e.r1mle:1
from mnurnerublr
cehserx, was we/led
from the verve! to (he
rivrtrbtmks (Irma:
mzilmndzm zIc‘cmnparvieri this royal
pmgre.r.r. some of them
following the zjuecm on
both sides‘ ofthe river
from in wry mouth,
while others hurried
down from the city of
'l‘ur.su.r to gaze at the
siglx/. Gratlzmllv the
crowds rlri/led LH1-‘(U2
from the nzarkaiplucc.
370 LAW 3 7
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW I
In the early 1780s. word spread through Berlin of the strange and spectacular medical practice of a Dr. Weisleder. He performed his miracles in an
enormous converted beer hall, outside which Berliners began to notice
ever longer lines of people—-the blind, the lame, anyone with an illness in
curable by normal medicine. When it leaked out that the doctor worked by
exposing the patient to the rays of the moon, he soon became dubbed The
Moon Doctor ofBerlin.
Sometime in 1783, it was reported that Dr. Weisleder had cured a well»
to—do woman of a terrible ailment. He suddenly became a
celebrity. Previ~
ously only the poorest Berliners had been seen waiting outside the beer
hall in their rags; now magnificent carriages were parked outside, and gentlemen in frock coats, and ladies with enormous coiffures, lined the street
as sunset drew near. Even folk with the mildest of ailments came, out of
sheer curiosity, As they waited in line, the poorer clients would explain to
the gentlemen and ladies that the doctor only practiced when the moon
was in its increscent phase. Many would add that they themselves had al
ready been exposed to the healing powers he called forth from the rays of
the moon. Even those who felt cured kept coming back, drawn by this
powerful experience.
Inside the beer hall, a strange and stirring spectacle greeted the visitor:
Packed into the entrance hall was a crowd of all classes and ethnic bar.k~
grounds, a veritable Tower ofBabel. Through tall windows on the northern
side of the hall, silvery moonlight poured in at odd angles. The doctor and
his wife, who, it seemed, was also able to effect the cure, practiced on the
second floor, which was reached by at stairway, at the end ofthe hall. As the
line edged closer to the stairs, the sick would hear shouts and cries from
above, and word would spread of, perhaps, a blind gentleman suddenly
able to see.
Once upstairs, the line would fork in two directions, toward a northern room for the doctor, a southern one for his wife, who worked only on
the ladies. Finally, after hours of anticipation and waiting in line, the gentlemen patients would be led before the amazing doctor himself, an cl‘
derly man with a few stalks of wild gray hair and an air of nervous energy.
He would take the patient (let us say a
young boy, brought in by his father), uncover the afflicted body part, and lift the boy up to the window,
which faced the light of the moon. He would rub the site of the injury or
illness, mumble something unintelligible, look knowingly at the moon,
and then, after collecting his fee, send the boy and his father on their way.
Meanwhile, in the sout.h~faciug room, his wife would be doing the same
with the 1adies~——which was odd, really, since the moon cannot appear in
two places at once; it cannot have been visible, in other words, from both
windows. Apparently the mere thought, idea, and symbol of the moon
were enough, for the ladies did not complain, and would later remark
confidently that the wife of the Moon Doctor had the same healing powers
as he.
Interpretation
Dr Weislecler may have known nothing about medicine, but he understood human nature. He recognized that people do not always want words,
or rational explanations, or demonstrations of the powers of science; they
want an immediate appeal to their emotions. Give them that and they will
do the rest—such as imagine they can be healed by the light reflected from
a rock a quarter million miles away. Dr. Weisleder had no need of pills, or
of lengthy lectures on the moon’s power, or of any silly gadgetry to amplify
its rays. He understood that the simpler the spectacle the better—just the
moonlight pouring in from the side, the stairway leading to the heavens,
and the rays of the moon, whether directly visible or not. Any added effects might have made it seem that the moon was not strong enough on its
own. And the moon was strong enough——it was a magnet for fantasies, as it
has been throughout history. Simply by associating himself with the image
of the moon, the doctor gained power.
Remember: Your search for power depends on shortcuts. You must always circumvent people’s suspicions, their perverse desire to resist your
will. Images are an extremely effective shortcut: Bypassing the head, the
seat of doubt and resistance, they aim straight for the heart. Overwhelming
the eyes, they create powerful associations, bringing people together and
stirring their emotions. With the white light of the moon in their eyes, your
targets are blinded to the deceptions you practice.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW II
In 1536 the future king Henri II of France took his first mistress, Diane de
Poitiers. Diane was t.hirty—seven at the time, and was the widow of the
grand seneschal of Normandy. Henri, meanwhile, was a sprightly lad of
seventeen, who was just beginning to sow his wild oats. At first their union
seemed merely platonic, with Henri showing an intensely spiritual devotion to Diane. But it soon became clear that he loved her in every way, preferring her bed to that of his young wife, Catherine de’ Médicis.
In 1547 King Francis died and Henri ascended to the throne. This new
situation posed perils for Diane de Poitiers. She had just turned forty-eight,
and despite her notorious cold baths and rumored youth potions, she was
beginning to show her age; now that Henri was king, perhaps he would return to the queen's bed, and do as other kings had done—choose mistresses from the bevy of beauties who made the French court the envy of
Europe. He was, after all, only twenty-eight, and cut a dashing figure. But
Diane did not give up so easily. She would continue to enthrall her lover,
as she had enthralled him for the past eleven years.
Diane’s secret weapons were symbols and images, to which she had always paid great attention. Early on in her relationship with Henri, she had
created a motif by intertwining her initials with his, to symbolize their
union. The idea worked like a charm: Henri put this insignia everywhereon his royal robes, on monuments, on churches, on the facade of the
where Antony uwaitvri
the queen emhroned on
his tribunal, mm"! at last
he was left sitting quite
alonn. And the word
spread on every side
[hat Aphrodite had
come to navel with
Dionysus for the
happiness ofAxia.
/imony than smr a
message inviting
C'Ieo[1utra to dine with
him. But she thought it
more appmprime thal
he should come to her,
and so. as he wished to
show his courtesy and
goodwill, he accepted
and went. He found the
prcpariuirmx made to
receive him rnagnificent
Ileyolxd words, but
what a.s'toni.s'hezl him
most of all was the
extraordinary number
of Iiglits. So many of
them it is said, were let
down from the roof
and ¢Il.x‘[)luyell on all
sides at ante. and they
were arranged and
grouped m .Yll('l’l ingenious patterns in relation to emrh olhr-.r, .s'mmin squares and some in
circles, thm they (.‘f€(lll’ll
as brilliant a spectacle
as can ever haw been
zle\«'is'ed to delight
the eye.
LIFE OF ANTONY.
l’LlI'i‘AR(‘H.
c. A.D. 4ti—l20
In the Middle Ages /he
.\’ymlwli.\‘t umrudv was
much more in evidmce.
. . . Syrnbolisrn appears
as (1 sort o_/Crlwrt out of
thought. lmtezul of
looking for the relaliml
LAW 37 311
between two things by
following the hidden
demurs of their causal
cormexions, thought
makes a
leap and
discovers their relation
nothnhecnnnenon
of cause and effects,
but in a connexion of
signification. . . .
Symbolist thought
permits an infinity of
relations between
things. Each thing may
denote a number of
distinct ideas by its
different special qualities. and a quality may
have several symbolic
meanings. The highest
conceptions have
symbols by the thousand. Nothing is too
humble to represent
and glory the sublime.
The walnut signifies
Christ: the sweet kernel
is His divine nature, the
green and pulpv outer
peel is His humanity,
the wooden shell
between is the cross.
Thus all things raise
his thoughts to the
eternal. . . . Every
precious stone, besides
its natural splendour
sparkles with the brilliance ofits symbolic
values. The assimilation
ofmrer and virginity is
much more than a
poetic comparison, for
it reveals their common
essence. As each nation
arises in the mind the
logic of.t_vmbolism
creates an harmony
ofitieas.
ll-IF. wmsmo or TH}:
MIDDLE AGES.
.ImmN HUIZINGA,
I928
312 LAW 37
Louvre, then the royal palace in Paris. Dia.ne’s favorite colors were black
and white, which she wore exclusively, and wherever it was possible the insignia appeared in these colors. Everyone recognized the symbol and its
meaning. Soon after Henri took the throne, however, Diane went still fur»
ther: She decided to identify herself with the Roman goddess Diana, her
namesake. Diana was the goddess of the hunt, the traditional royal pastime
and the particular passion of Henri. Equally important, in Renaissance an
she symbolized chastity and purity. For a woman like Diane to identify herself with this goddess would instantly call up those images in the court, giving her an air of respectability. Symbolizing her “chaste” relationship with
Henri, it would also set her apart from the adulterous liaisons ofroyal mistresses past.
To efiect this association, Diane began by completely transforming her
castle at Anet. She razed the building’s structure and in its place erected a
magnificent Doric-columned edifice modeled after a Roman temple. It was
~
made in white Normandy stone flecked with black silex, reproducing
Diane’s trademark colors of black and white. The insignia of her and
Henn"s initials appeared on the columns, the doors, the windows, the can
pet. Meanwhile, symbols of Diana—crescent moons, stags, and houndsadomed the gates and facade. Inside, enormous tapestries depicting
episodes in the life of the goddess lay on the floors and hung on the walls.
In the garden stood the famous Goujon sculpture Diane Chasseresxe, which is
now in the Louvre, and which had an uncanny resemblance to Diane de
Poitiers. Paintings and other depictions of Diana appeared in every comer
of the castle.
Anet overwhelmed Henri, who soon was trumpeting the image of
Diane de Poitiers as a Roman goddess. In 1548, when the couple appeared
together in Lyons for a
royal celebration, the townspeople welcomed them
with a tableau vimznt depicting a scene with Diana the huntress. France’s
greatest poet of the period, Pierre de Ronsard, began to write verses in
honor of Diana—indeed a kind of cult of Diana sprang up, all inspired by
the king’s mistress. It seemed to Henri that Diane had given herself a kind
of divine aura, and as if he were destined to worship her for the rest of his
life. And until his death, in 1559, he did remain faithful to her—making her
a duchess, giving her untold wealth, and displaying an almost religious do
votion to his first and only mistress.
Interpretation
Diane de Poitiers, a woman from a modest bourgeois background, managed to captivate Henri for over twenty years. By the time he died she was
well into her sixties, yet his passion for her only increased with the years.
She knew the king well. He was not an intellectual but a lover of the outdoors——he particularly loved jousting tournaments, with their bright pennants, brilliantly caparisoned horses, and beautifully dressed women.
Henri’s love of visual splendor seemed childlike to Diane, and she played
on this weakness of his at every opportunity.
Most astute of all was Diane’s appropriation of the goddess Diana.
Here she took the game beyond physical imagery into the realm of the psychic symbol. It was quite a feat to transform a king’s mistress into an emblem of power and purity, but she managed it. Vfithout the resonance of
the goddess, Diane was merely anraging courtesan. With the imagery and
symbolism of Diana on her shoulders, she seemed a mythic force, destined
for greatness.
You too can play with images like these, weaving visual clues into an
encompassing gestalt, as Diane did with her colors and her insignia. Establish a trademark like these to set yourself apart. Then take the game fur
ther: Find an image or symbol from l'.l1e past that will neatly fit your
situation, and put it on your shoulders like a
cape. It will make you seem
larger than life.
Because ofthe light it shines on the other stars which make up a kind of
court around it, became ofthejust and equal distribution ofits rays to
all alike, because ofthe good it brings to all places, [zmducing life, joy
and action, bemuse ofits wnstamy from which it never varies, I chose
the mm as the most magnificent image to represent a great leader.
Louis XIV the Sun King, 16384715
KEYS TO POWER
Using words to plead your case is business: Words are dangerous instruments, and often go astray. The words people use to persuade us virtually invite us to reflect on them with words of our own; we mull them over,
and often end up believing the opposite of what they say. (That is part of
our perverse nature.) It also happens that words offend us, stirring up associations unintended by the speaker.
The visual, on the other hand, short-circuits the labyrinth of words. It
strikes with an emotional power and immediacy that leave no gaps for reflecfion and doubt. Like music, it leaps right over rational, reasonable
droughts. Imagine the Moon Doctor trying to make a case for his medical
practice, trying to convince the unconverted by telling them about the
healing powers of the moon, and about his own special connection to a distant object in the sky. Fortunately for him, he was able to create a compelling spectacle that made words unnecessary. The moment his patients
entered the beer hall, the image of the moon spoke eloquently enough.
Understand: Words put you on the defensive. If you have to explain
yourself your power is already in question. The image, on the other hand,
imposes itself as a given. It discourages questions, creates forceful associations, resists unintended interpretations, communicates instantly, and
forges bonds that transcend social dilferences. Words stir up arguments
and divisions; images bring people together. They are the quintessential instruments of power.
The symbol has the same force, whether it is visual (the statue of
Then: was a man
named Saknmoroyn
Hechigwan who [wed
in upper Kyoto. . . .
When [Emperor]
Hideyor/zi gave his
great Chmno-yu [ma
ceremony] meeting at
Kimno in the temh
month of 1588. Her:higwrm rel up a grant red
mnhrelln nine feet
across mounted on a
stick seven feet high,
The circunrference of
the handle lu-
.-rurrourzdedfor allow
two feet by a reed fence
in such a way that the
rays ofthe rim were
reflected from it and
difjizsed the colour of
the umbrella all
around. '1‘}ri.r device
pleased Hide}-oshi so
much that he remitted‘
Hechigwuniv laxex as a
reward.
can-no-yo:
run .3/\ PA NESF TEA
¢‘léRl?M(\NY.
A. L. Sm»;-.n.
1962
LAW 3 7 313
314 LAW 37
Diana) or a verbal description of something visual (the words “the Sun
King”). The symbolic object stands for something else, something abstract
(such as the image “Diana” standing for chastity). The abstract conceptpurity, patriotism, courage, lovc~—~is full of emotional and powerful associations. The symbol is a shortcut of expression, containing dozens of
meanings in one simple phrase or object. The symbol of the Sun King, as
explained by Louis XIV, can be read on many layers, but the beauty ofit is
that its associations required no explanation, spoke immediately to his subjects, distinguished him from all other kings, and conjured up a kind of
majesty that went far beyond the words themselves. The symbol contains
untold power.
The first step in using symbols and images is to understand the primacy of sight among the senses. Before the Renaissance, it has been an
gued, sight and the other senses--taste, touch, and so on-—-operated on a
relatively equal plane. Since then, however, the visual has come to dominate the others, and is the sense we most depend on and trust. As Gracién
said, “The truth is generally seen, rarely heard.” When the Renaissance
painter Fra Filippo Lippi was a captured slave among the Moors, he won
his freedom by sketching a drawing of his master on a white wall with a
piece of charcoal; when the owner saw the drawing, he instantly understood the power of a man who could make such images, and let Fra Lippi
go. That one image was far more powerful than any argument the artist
could have made with words.
Never neglect the way you arrange things visually. Factors like color,
for example, have enormous symbolic resonance. When the con artist Yellow Kid Weil created a newsletter touting the phony stocks he was peddling, he called it the “Red Letter Newsletter” and had it printed, at
considerable expense, in red ink. The color created a sense of urgency,
power, and good fortune. Weil recognized details like these as keys to deception—as do modern advertisers and mass-marketers. If you use “gold”
in the title of anything you are trying to sell, for example, print it in gold.
.Since the eye predominates, people will respond more to the color than to
the word.
The wsual contains great emotional power. The Roman emperor Constantine worshipped the sun as a god for most of his life; one day, though,
he looked up at the sun, and saw a cross superimposed on it. The vision of
the cross over the sun proved to him the ascendancy of the new religion,
and he converted not just himself but the whole Roman Empire to Christianity soon thereafter. All the preaching and proselytizing in the world
could not have been as powerful. Find and associate yourself with the images and symbols that will communicate in this immediate way today, and
you will have untold power.
Most effective ofall is anew con1bination—a fusion ofimages and symbols that have not been seen together before, but that through their association clearly demonstrate your new idea, message, religion. The creation of
new images and symbols out of old ones in this way has a poetic effectviewers’ associations run rampant. giving them a sense of participation.
Visual images often appear in a
sequence, and the order in which they
appear creates a symbol. The first to appear, for instance, symbolizes
power; the image at the center seems to have central importance‘
Near the end of World War II, orders came down from General Eisenhower thax American troops were to lead the way into Paris after its liber~
ation from the Nazis. The French general Charles de Gaulle, however,
realized that this sequence would imply that the Americans now commanded the fate of France. Through much manipulation, de Gaulle made
certain that he and the French Second Armored Division would appear at
the head of the liberating force. The strategy worked: After he had success
fully pulled off this stunt, the Allies started treating him as the new leader
of an independent France. De Gaulle knew that a leader has to locate him’
self literally at the head ofhis troops. This visual association is crucial to the
emotional response that he needs to elicit.
Things change in the game of symbols: It is probably no longer possiv
ble to pose as a “sun king,” or to wrap the mantle ofDiana around you. Yet
you can associate yourself with such symbols more indirectly. And, of
course, you can make your own mythology out of figures from more recent history, people who are comfortably dead but still powerfully associaw
five in the public eye. The idea is to give yourself an aura, a stature that
your normal banal appearance simply will not create. By herself Diane de
Poitiers had no such radiant powers; she was as human and ordinary as
most of us. But the symbol elevated her above the human lot, and made
her seem divine.
Using symbols also has a courtierlike effect, since they are often gentler than brutish words. The psychotherapist Dr. Milton H. Erickson always tried to find symbols and images that would communicate to the
patient in ways that words could not. When dealing with a severely trou~
bled patient, he would not question him directly but would talk about
something irrelevant, such as driving through the desert in Arizona, where
he practiced in the 19505. In describing this he would eventually come to
an appropriate symbol for what he suspected was the man’s problem. If he
felt the palient was isolated, say, Dr. Erickson would talk of a single ironwood tree, and how its isolation left it battered by the winds. Making an
emotional connection with the tree as a symbol, the patient would open up
more readily to the doctor’: probing.
Use the power of symbols as a way to rally, animate, and unite your
troops or team. During the rebellion against the French crown in 1648,
those loyal to the king disparaged the rebels by comparing them to the
slingshots (in French, fiandesl that little boys use to frighten big boys. Cardi~
nal de Retz decided to turn this disparaging term into the rebels’ symbol:
The uprising was now known as the Fronde, and the rebels as fivndeurs.
They began to wear sashes in their hats that symbolized the slingshot, and
the word became their rallying cry. Without it the rebellion might well
have petered out Always find a symbol to represent your cause—the more
emotional associations, the better.
The best way to use images and symbols is to organize them into a
LAW 37 .315
grand spectacle that awes people and distracts them from unpleasant realities. This is easy to do: People love what is grand, spectacular, and larger
than life. Appeal to their emotions and they will flock to your spectacle in
hordes. The visual is the easiest route to their heans.
Image:
The Cross and the
Sun. Crucifixion and
total radiance. With one
imposed over the other, a
new reality takes shape—
a new power is in the
ascendant. The symbol-no explanation
necessary.
Authority: The people are
always impressed by the
superficial appearamze of
things. . . . The [prince] should,
at fitting times of the year,
keep the people occupied
and distracted with festivities
and spectacles. (Niccolo
Maclliavelli, 1469-»l527)
REVERSAL
No power is made available by ignoring images and symbols. There is no
possible reversal to this law.
316 LAW 37
38
TT{INH§¢AS’Y()[IIJI{E
BIJ17I3EI{AOJE LIFCE
OTHERS
JUDGMENT
Ifyou make a show ofgoing against the times, flaunting
your unconventional ideas and unorthodox ways, people
will think that you only want attention and that you
look down upon them. They willfind a way to punish
you for making themfeel inferior. It is for safer to blend
in and nurture the common touch. Share your orig2'nal—
ity only wéth tolerant fiiends and those who are sure to
appreciate your uniqueness.
317'
|HI\|\ \\II‘l| Illl Ivl \X
\\|)«'I*l-Hi \H‘HI
|I|I.\l\\\
/I in. ctzsy‘ (0 nm mm
drzluzcr by try:/lg 10
rwinz against the
szream. Onty a Smrrarav
coufri attempt m do
that. Diwzgreemwil is‘
rztgaldeti as o/'f<>:z.~u'x'<>
herzmw ii is a 1 1Imlr‘mManon 1/fihe view of
U1/l(3r.Y;H1(‘ riumhmxx‘ of
111:» rlisgmnrlwl grow,
on urcoimt ei/her of
mum‘ mm/er I/mt hm‘
been the alum‘! of
(‘é,'I1.\‘lIre or ufsunm
person who {tux prai.\'ei1
it: 'l’m1li iv for NH’ few,
error I)‘ as nsmll as '3'
vulgar. Nor ix‘ IP14: n e
man (0 he re<'ogni:»',4*d
by lfhilf he rays in the
marketplace. for hf
vpcakr rhrre mil with
his own voice. but will
that (7fur1iver.\'rII /‘ally,
h(m'ewrr mm:Iz /li.\’
imnnrt tlirzughlx may
gcunsay 11.‘ The wise
man avuiilx beirig
cantradtcletl ax sedulaurly (IA he amid:
cmrlmdicfi/lg; Ilw
pm‘)[ir£ty of l7£!Il.\I4l r’ it
wirlxhe-Iii ]‘l‘()IIl that
which re'ut§1e'_y provokes
Ir. Timzrgh: is flrca: ii
Lamml and rshnuld not
be crierctrd; retire into
(her .ram'tuary 0f_\=r)ur
.5‘ nce und I/you
5()melimes allow yourrulf to break it, do so
under the ne;:i.s' of u
llI.S'L‘Vt’L’I few.
BALTAX/xR (‘rR.-xi‘!/x.~.
l(>(ll W058
318 LAW 38
TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW
Around the year 478 B.C., the city of Sparta sent an expedition to Persia led
by the young Spartan nobleman Pausanias. The city—states of Greece had
recently fought off a mighty invasion from Persia, and now Pausanias,
along with allied ships from Athens, had orders to punish the invaders and
win back the islands and coastal towns that the Persians had occupied.
Both the Athenians and the Spartans had great respect for Pausanias-—he
had proven himself as a fearless warrior, with a flair for the dramatic.
With amazing speed, Pausanias and his troops took Cyprus, then
moved on to the mainland of Asia Minor known as the Hellespont and
captured Byzantium {modem-day Istanbul). Now master of part of the Persian empire, Pausanias began to show signs of behavior that went beyond
his normal flarnboyance. He appeared in public wearing pomades in his
hair and flowing Persian robes, and accompanied by a bodyguard ofEgyptians. He held lavish banquets in which he sat in the Persian manner and
demanded to be entertained. He stopped seeing his old friends, entered
into communication with the Persian King Xerxes, and all in all affected
the style and manner of a Persian dictator.
Clearly power and success had gone to Pausanias’s head. His armyAthenians and Spartans alike—at first thought this a passing fancy: He had
always been a bit exaggerated in his gestures. But when he ilaunted his disdain for the Greeks’ simple way of life, and insulted the common Greek
soldier, they began to feel he had gone too far. Although there was no con’
crete evidence for this, rumors spread that he had gone over to the other
side, and that he dreamed of becoming a kind of Greek Xerxes. To quell
the possibility of mutiny, the Spartans relieved Pausanias of his command
and called him home.
Pausanias, however, continued to dress in the Persian style, even in
Sparta. After a few months be independently hired a trireme and returned
to the Hellespont, telling his compatriots he was going to continue the Fight
against the Persians. Actually, however, he had different plans———to make
himself ruler of all Greece, with the aid of Xerxes himself. The Spartans
declared him a public enemy and sent a ship to Capture him. Pausanias surrendered, certainlthat he could clear himself of the charges of treason. It
did come out during the trial that during his reign as commander he had
offended his fellow Greeks time and again, erecting monuments, for instance, in his own name, rather than in those of the cities whose troops had
fought alongside him, as was the custom. Yet Pausanias proved right: De~
spite the evidence of his numerous contacts with the enemy, the Spartans
refused to imprison a man of such noble birth, and let him go.
Now thinking himself untouchable, Pausanias hired a messenger to
take a letter to Xerxes, but the messenger instead took the letter to the
Spartan authorities. These men wanted to find out more, so they had the
messenger arrange to meet Pausanias in a
temple where they could hide
and listen behind a partition. l/Vhat Pausanias said shocked them»-they
had never heard such contempt for their ways spoken so brazenly by one
of their 0wn—-—and they made arrangements for his immediate arrest.
On his way home from the temple, Pausanias got word of what had
happened. He ran to another temple to hide, but the authorities followed
him there and placed sentries all around. Pausanias refused to surrender.
Unwilling to forcibly remove him from the sacred temple, the authorities
kept him trapped inside, until he eventually died of starvation.
Interpretation
At first glance it might seem that Pausanias simply fell in love with another
culture, a phenomenon as old as time. Never comfortable with the asceticism of the Spartans, he found himself enthralled by the Persian love of
luxury and sensual pleasure. He put on Persian robes and perfumes with a
sense of deliverance from Greek discipline and simplicity.
This is how it appears when people adopt a culture in which they were
not raised. Often, however, there is also something else at play: People
who flaunt their infatuation with a different culture are expressing a dis
dain and contempt for their own. They are using the outward appearance
of the exotic to separate themselves from the common folk who unquestioningly follow the local customs and laws, and to express their sense of
superiority. Otherwise they would act with more dignity, showing respect
for those who do not share their desires. Indeed their need to show their
difference so dramatically often makes them disliked by the people whose
beliefs they challenge, indirectly and subtly, perhaps, but’ offensively
nonetheless.
As Thucydides wrote of Pausanias, “By his contempt for the laws and
his imitation of foreign ways he had made himself very widely suspected of
being unwilling to abide by normal standards.” Cultures have norms that
reflect centuries of shared beliefs and ideals. Do not expect to scoff at such
things with impunity. You will be punished somehow, even ifjust through
isolation—a position ofreal powerlessness.
Many of us, like Pausanias, feel the siren call of the exotic, the foreign‘
Measure and moderate this desire. Flaunting your pleasure in alien ways of
thinking and acting will reveal a different motive————to demonstrate your superiority over your fellows.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAVV
During the late sixteenth century, a violent reaction against the Protestant
Reformation erupted in Italy. The Counter-Reformation, as it was called,
included its own version of the Inquisition to root out all deviations from
the Catholic Church. Among its victims was the scientist Galileo, but an
important thinker who suffered even greater persecution was the Dominican monk and philosopher Tommaso Campanella.
A follower of the materialist doctrine of the Roman philosopher Epicums, Campanella did not believe in miracles, or in heaven and hell. The
Church had promoted such superstitions, he wrote, to control the common
folk by keeping them in fear. Such ideas verged on atheism, and Campanella. expressed them incautiously. In 1593 the Inquisition threw him
Bone vixil, qui bone
latuit~“lIe lives well
who (‘0fl(,‘(,’lZl.\‘ himself _
well."
Ovm,
c. 43 B.(7.—/\.D. 18
Wise men /should be]
like (‘offers with double
bottoms: Which when
ozhem look into, being
opened. they see not all
that they hold.
SIR \V/\l,TFR l{Al.F.!(‘vH.
1554-161 8
\K |l|Cl\ 'l'| ll; \\ NI lil(~2
\X|~‘,l{l“,(1|M,\(y|ul)
()Il(‘.I.’ upon a yirrw
Klzidn the teacher of
Moms, culled upon
Immklml with it warming. At a certain dtllt’,
he said. all the water in
the world which had
no! been specially
huunlerl, would lllSLl[rpear. It would then be
l‘(f7té,’W€(l. with difjfarrzrtr
water. wlzlcli would
drive men marl.
Only one man /iivtz-nod
to the meaning of this
advice. He collected
water and went to ll
secure plum where he
.\‘t0red it, and waiwd for
the wiuer 11) change its
i'ht2raL'm'.
On the Il[)]7(IlH{(‘.tl (I/715’
the streanm .Str>p]7P(l
running, the wells‘ want
dry. and the man who
had llA‘(€H(>.’(l, seeing this
LAW 33 319
happening. went to fair
retreat and rlmvak hrs
preserved water.
When he saw, from his
s‘ecuri!y, the wan-rfnlls
again bagimzing to
flow, this man
(lra.\'m>nded armmg (he
other sores nfmen. HP
found that (hey were
thinking and mlking in
an mzrirely different
way from before; ye!
they had no menzwy of
who! had Imppened.
nor of having been
warned. When he tried
to talk to them, he real»
ized that they thought
that he was mad. and
they showed hostility or
compassion, no: tmdan
standing.
A! first he drank nmw
oflhe new water, but
went back to his
concealment, I1) draw
on his supplies, every
day. Finally, however.
he took the ditrisimr to
drink the new water
bc(‘au.ra he could not
bear the lormlirresr of
living. In-Imwng and
thinking in re different
way from everyone
else. He drank the new
water, and became like
the res!. ‘T1101; he forgo!
all aboul his own rmre
of special water. and
his fellows began to
look upon him at a
mailman who had
miruc'ulr)u.vly been
reslored Z0 sanity.
'lA1.ES OF
‘nu: ma Rvisnss,
IDRIES SHAH.
I 967
320 LAW 38
into prison for his heretical beliefs. Six years later, as a form of partial re
lease, he was confined to a monastery in Naples.
Southern Italy was controlled by Spain at the time, and in Naples
Campanella became involved in a plot to fight and throw out these in»
vaders. His hope was to establish an independent republic based on his
own ideas of utopia. The leaders of the Italian Inquisition, working with
their Spanish counterparts, had him imprisoned again. This time they also
tortured him, to discover the true nature ofhis impious beliefs: He was subjected to the infamous la zzeglia, a torture in which he was suspended by his
arms in a squatting position a few inches above a seat studded with spikes.
The posture was impossible to sustain, and in time the victim would end up
sitting on the spikes, which would tear his flesh at the slightest contact.
During these years, however, Campanella learned something about
power. Facing the prospect of execution for heresy, he changed his s|:a.t~
egy: He would not renounce his beliefs, yet he knew he had to disguise
their outward appearance.
To save his life, Campanella feigned madness. He let his inquisifors
imagine thax his beliefs stemmed from an inconuollable unsoundness of
mind. For a while the tortures continued, to see if his insanity was faked,
but in 1603 his sentence was commuted to life in prison. The first four
years of this he spent chained to a wall in an underground dungeon. De»
spite such conditions, he continued to write--although no longer would he
be so foolish as to express his ideas directly.
One book of Ca.mpa.uella’s, 771:: Hispanic Monardzy, promoted the idea
that Spain had a divine. mission to expand its powers around the world,
and offered the Spanish king practical, Machiavelli-type advice for achieving this. Despite his own interest in Machiavelli, the book in general pre
sented ideas completely the opposite to his own. The Hispanirr Monarchy was
in fact a ploy, an attempt to show his conversion to orthodoxy in the boldest manner possible. It worked: In 1626, six years after its publication, the
pope finally let Campanella out of prison.
Shortly afier gaining his freedom, Campanella wrote Atheism Con»
guered, a book attacking ‘free-thinkers, Machiavellians, Calvinists, and
heretics of all stripes. The book is written in the form of debates in which
heretics express their beliefs and are countered by arguments for the supe
riority of Catholicism. Campanella had obviously reformed-his book
made that clear. Or did it?
The arguments in the mouths of the heretics had never before been
expressed with such verve and freshness. Pretending to present their side
only to knock it down, Campanella actually summarized the case against
Caxholicism with striking passion. “Then he argued the other side, supposedly his side, on the other hand, he resorted to stale clichés and convoluted
rationales. Brief and eloquent, the heretics’ arguments seemed bold and
sincere. The lengthy arguments for Catholicism seemed tiresome and 1m»
convincing.
Catholics who read the book found it disturbing and ambiguous, but
they could not claim it was heretical, or that Campanella should be returned to prison. His defense of Catholicism, after all, used arguments they
had used themselves. Yet in the years to come, Atizeism Conquered became a
bible for atheists, Machiavellians and liberfines who used the arguments
Campanella had put in their mouths to defend their dangerous ideas. Combining an outward display of conformity with an expression of his true he»
liefs in a way that his sympathizers would understand, Campanella showed
that he had learned his lesson.
Interpretation
In the face of awesome persecution, Campanella devised three strategic moves that saved his hide, freed him from prison, and allowed him to
continue to express his beliefs. First he feigned ma.dness—«the medieval
equivalent of disavowing responsibility for one’s actions, like blaming
one’s parents today. Next he wrote a book that expressed the exact opposite of his own beliefs. Finally, and most brilliantly of all, he disguised his
ideas while insinuating them at the same time. It is an old but powerful
trick: You pretend to disagree with dangerous ideas, but in the course of
your disagreement you give those ideas expression and exposure. You
seem to conform to the prevailing orthodoxy, but those who know will understand the irony involved. You are protected.
It is inevitable in society that certain values and customs lose contact
with their original motives and become oppressive. And there will always
be those who rebel against such oppression. harboring ideas far ahead of
their time. As Campanella was forced to realize, however, there is no point
in making a display of your dangerous ideas if they only bring you sullen
ing and persecution. Martyrdom serves no purpose~——better to live on in an
oppressive world, even to thrive in it Meanwhile find a way to express
your ideas subtly for those who understand you. Laying your pearls before
swine will only bring you trouble.
For a
longtime I have not said what I believed, nor do I ever believe
what I
say, and ifindeed sometimes I do happen to tell the truth,
I hide it among so many lies that it is hard tofind.
Ni(.'col1}Mazhzauelli, in a letter to ["mnc¢=,,vco Gmaciardini, May 17, 1521
KEYS TO POWER
We all tell lies and hide our true feelings, for complete free expression is a
social impossibility. From an early age we learn to conceal our thoughts,
telling the prickly and insecure what we know they want to hear, watching
carefully lest we otfend them. For most of us this is natural—there are ideas
and values that most people accept, and it is pointless to argue. We believe
what we want to, then, but on the outside we wear a mask.
There are people, however, who see such restraints as an intolerable
infringement on their freedom, and who have a need to prove the superiNcver combat any
man '5 opml'tm,'_)"nr
though you readied the
age ofil/Iethuselaix, you
would rzevw have dorm
setting him right upon
all the absurd things
that he believes.
II is also well to avoid
correcting people 3'
rnismket in com-ersw
lion, hmvn vet gum)
your intentirms may he;
for ti‘ is easy to offend
people, and diffictilz, if
not irriposxilvle to rruzml
Ihem.
Ifyau feel irritated by
the absurd remarks of
my people whose
can vemmon you
happen [0 overhear.
you should irnagine
that you are /ixrenittg m
Ihfl dialogue of two
fools in a comedy.
Probatum est.
The mum who comes
into the world with the
noiion that he is really
going to inslmcz it in
marten‘ of the highesz
irrzptlrltzmrr, may Ihtmlt
his stuns iflw £'S(’t2peS
with a whole skin.
ARTHUR
SCHOPENHAICER,
l788—- 1860
LAW 38 321
HM", fil’|'|Zl{\ .\\D
Tll|vL'l‘|i;\ .l.I.|:N
“Look aromitl _w2z1,"
said the cirizcn. "This is
the largest maria’! in
the world. "
"Oh xurely I101,
"
said
I/ta traveller.
“Well. perhaps not
the largesl, "
mid the
cilizzm, "but much
the‘ best. "
"You are certainlv
wrong tfzerc,"s(1id the
traveller. “I can Isl!
you. . .
They buried the
xmznger in the dusk.
MEL:-;x,
R<)HIiIl'l‘ Lot. is
STEV1-LNSKJN. 18504894
IfMachfav<-,llihz1dlm(l
a prim‘? for (llSc‘lplP,
tlaefirsr lining he would
have recomrrzendezf
him to do would have
been to wrize a [wok
aguirm MucI1i1weIli.a‘m.
VULFAIRE.
1694 l778
3.12 LAW 38
ority of their values and beliefs. In the end, though, their arguments convince only a few and offend a great deal more. The reason arguments do
not work is that most people hold their ideas and values without thinking
about them. There is a
strong emotional content in their beliefs: They really do not want to have to rework their habits of thinking, and when you
challenge them, whether directly through your arguments or indirectly
through your behavior, they are hostile.
Wise and clever people learn early on that they can display conventional behavior and mouth conventional ideas without having to believe in
them. The power these people gain from blending in is that of being left
alone to have the thoughts they want to have, and to express them to the
people they want to express them to, without suliering isolation or as
tracism. Once they have established themselves in a position of power,
they can try to convince a wider circle of the correctness of their ideasperhaps working indirectly, using Campanella’s strategies of irony and insinuation.
In the late fourteenth century, the Spanish began a. massive persecution of the Jews, murdering thousands and driving others out of the coun»
try. Those who remained in Spain were forced to convert. Yet over the next
three hundred years, the Spanish noticed a phenomenon that disturbed
them: Many of the converts lived their outward lives as Catholics, yet
somehow managed to retain their Jewish beliefs, practicing the religion in
private. Many of these so-called Marranos (originally a derogatory term,
being the Spanish for “pig”) attained high levels of government office, married into the nobility, and gave every appearance of Christian piety, only
to be discovered late in life as practicing Jews. (The Spanish Inquisition
was specifically commissioned to ferret them out.) Over the years they
mastered the art of dissimulation, displaying cmcifixes liberally, giving
generous gifts to churches, even occasionally making anti-Semitic
rema.rks—~and all the while maintaining their inner freedom and beliefs.
In society, the Man-anos knew, outward appearances are what matter.
This remains true today. The strategy is simple: As Campanella did in writing Atheism Conquered, make a show of blending in, even going so far as to
be the most zealous advocate of the prevailing orthodoxy. If you stick to
conventional appearances in public few will believe you think differently
in private.
Do not be so foolish as to imagine that in our own time the old ortho—
doxies are gone. Jonas Salk, for instance, thought science had gotten past
politics and protocol. And so, in his search for a polio vaccine, he broke all
the rules--going public with a discovery before showing it to the scientific
community, taking credit for the vaccine without acknowledging the scientists who had paved the way, making himself a star. The public may have
loved him but scientists shunned him. His disrespect for his community’s
orthodoxies left him isolated, and he wasted years trying to heal the
breach, and struggling for funding and cooperation.
Bertolt Brecht underwent a modern form of Inquisition—tl1e House
Un—American Activities Committee-and approached it with considerable
canniness. Having worked off and on in the American film industry during
World War II, in 1947 Brecht was summoned to appear before the committee to answer quesfions on his suspected Communist sympathies. Other
writers called before the committee made a point of attacking its members,
and of acting as belligerently as possible in order to gain sympathy for
themselves. Brecht, on the other hand, who had actually worked stead»
lastly for the Communist cause, played the opposite game: He answered
questions with ambiguous generalities that defied easy interpretation. Call
it the Carnpanella strategy. Brecht even were a suit————a rare event for him—-
and made a point of smoking a cigar during the proceedings, knowing that
akey committee member had a passion for cigars. In the end he charmed
the committee members, who let him go scobfree.
Brecht then moved to East Germany, where he encountered a different kind ofInquisition. Here the Communists were in power, and they crit»
icized his plays as decadent and pessimistic. He did not argue with them,
but made small changes in the performance scripts to shut them up. Mean«
while he managed to preserve the published texts as written. His outward
conformity in both cases gave him the freedom to work unhindered, with
out having to change his thinking. In the end, he made his way safely
through dangerous times in different countries through the use of little
dances of orthodoxy, and proved he was more powerful than the forces of
repression.
Not only do people of power avoid the offenses of Pausanias and Salk,
they also learn to play the clever fox and feign the common touch. This has
been the ploy of con artists and politicians throughout the centuries. Leaders like Julius Caesar and Franklin D. Roosevelt have overcome their nab
ural aristocratic stance to cultivate a
familiarity with the common man.
They have expressed this familiarity in little gestures, often symbolic, to
show the people that their leaders share popular values, despite their different status.
The logical extension of this practice is the invaluable ability to be all
things to all people. When you go into society, leave behind your own
ideas and values, and put on the mask that is most appropriate for the
group in which you find yourself. Bismarck played this game successfully
for yearsmthere were people who vaguely understood what he was up to,
but not clearly enough that it mattered. People will swallow the bait because it flatters them to believe that you share their ideas. They will not
take you as a hypocrite if you are careful~——for how can they accuse you of
hypocrisy if you do not let them know exactly what you stand for? Nor will
they see you as lacking in values. Of course you have values~——the values
you share with them, while in their company.
Authority: Do not give dogs what is holy; and do not throw
your pearls before swine, lest they trample them under
foot and turn to attack you. Uesus Christ, Matthew 7:6)
LAW 38 323
."1'.‘.’-? LAW 38
Image: '
The Black The herd shuns the
Sheep black sheep, uncertain
whether or not it belongs
with them. So it stragles behind, or wanders away from
the herd, where it is cornered
by wolves and promptly devoured. Stay with the herd—
there is safety in numbers, Keep
your differences in your
thoughts and not in your fleece.
REVE RSAL
The only time it is worth standing out is when you already stand outwhen you have achieved an unshakable position of power, and can display
your difference from others as a sign of the distance between you. As pres—
ident of the United States, Lyndon Johnson would sometimes hold meetings while he sat on the toilet. Since no one else either could or would
claim such a
“privilege,” Johnson was showing people that he did not have
to observe the protocols and nicefies of others. The Roman emperor
Caligula played the same game: He would wear a woman’s negligee, or a
bathrobe, to receive important visitors. He even went so far as to have his
horse elected consul. But it backfired, for the people hated Caligula, and
his gestures eventually brought his overthrow. The truth is that even those
who attain the heights of power would be better off at least affecting the
common touch, for at some point they may need popular support.
Finally, there is always a place for the gadfly, the person who successfully defies custom and mocks what has grown lifeless in a culture. Oscar
Wilde, for example, achieved considerable social power on this foundation: He made it clear that he disdained the usual ways ofdoing things, and
when he gave public readings his audiences not only expected him to insult them but welcomed it We notice, however, that his eccentric role
eventually destroyed him. Even had he come to a better end, remember
that he possessed an unusual genius: Without his gift to amuse and delight,
his barbs would simply have offended people.
LAW
39
STIR UP WATERS
TO CATCH FISH
jUDGMENT
Anger and ematizm are strategically counterproductive.
You must always stay calm. and objective. But zfyou can
make your enemies angry while staying calm yomselfi
you gain a decided advanlagv. Put your enemies ojf~bal~
ance: Find the ciaink in their vanity through wlzich you
can rattlz them andyou hold the strings.
1325
|‘I,\|\l l{\ h|I|t,|.Vl| \I:
(}l<l\|).‘".|I1‘(t\\\. II‘..\
The K}/(7!(t Sltttsltttitti
Itttkttra Suwu-no-kami
Sltigetmtrw was very
fond t)fChtt-no-yu
(the tctt (’£’l‘('ht()rIy), am!
used to grind his own
It'll Wl1llL‘.\'llll7tg in the
court as judge. And the
reason was this He
once asked a
friend ql
his who WAD‘ his
companion in Cha-noytt, 4) tea rnerchttnt
named Eiki, to tell him
fnmkly what was the
public opirtion about
him. "Well, "
stud Eikt.
“they say that you get
irritated with those who
don ‘I give their
irvitlimcie very cllcarly
and scold them, and to
people we afraid to
bring lawsuits before
you rmtl iftlwy do, the
truth does not come
out.
"
“Ah, lam glad you
have told the that,
"
replied Shigemtme, “for
now that I L'onxidvr it, I
have fallen into the
habit ()f.\‘[I(’{1l(lVlg
sharply to people in
this way, and no (l()ttl2Y
httmltlefolk and those
who are not rettrly in
speech getflttrried and
are ttmtble to put their
cttsc in the best light.
I will see to it that rltix
does not occur in the
future. ”
So after this he
had a tea mill plmwl
before him in court and
in from 0/ it the paperirtiverml shvji were
drawn to, and Shtgemime mt behind them
tttttl gmuntl the tea and
thus kept his mint]
calm while he heart!
the t:ttse.\: And he multl
326 LAW 3 9
TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW
In January of 1809, an agitated and anxious Napoleon hurried back to
Paris from his Spanish wars. His spies and confidants had confirmed a
rumor that his foreign minister Talleyrand had conspired against him with
Fouché, the minister of police. Immediately on arriving in the capital the
shocked emperor summoned his ministers to the palace. Following them
into the meeting right after their arrival, he began pacing up and down,
and started rambling vaguely about plotters working against him, speculators bringing down the stock market, legislators delaying his policies—a.nd
his own ministers undermining him.
As Napoleon talked, Talleyrand leaned on the mantelpiece, looking
completely indifferent. Facing Talleyrand directly, Napoleon announced,
“For these ministers, treason has begun when they permit themselves to
doubt.” At the word “treason” the ruler expected his minister to be afraid.
But Talleyrand only smiled, calm and bored.
The sight of a subordinate apparently serene in the face of charges that
could get him hanged pushed Napoleon to the edge. There were ministers,
he said, who wanted him dead, and he took a
step closer to Talleyrand—
who stared back at him unfazed. Finally Napoleon exploded. “You are a
coward,” he screamed in Talleyrand’s face, “a man of no faith. Nothing is
sacred to you. You would sell your own father. I have showered you with
riches and yet there is nothing you would not do to hurt me.” The other
ministers looked at each other in disbelief—they had never seen this fearless general, the conqueror of most ofEurope, so unhinged.
“You deserve to be broken like glass,” Napoleon continued, stamping.
“I have the power to do it, but I have too much contempt for you to bother.
Why didn’t I have you hanged from the gates of the Tuileries? But there is
still time for that.” Yelling, almost out of breath, his face red, his eyes
bulging, he went on, “You, by the way, are nothing but shit in a silk stocking. . . .What about your wife? You never told me that San Carlos was your
wife’s lover?” “Indeed, sire, it did not occur to me that this information had
any bearing on Your Majesty’s glory or my own,” said Talleyrand calmly,
completely unflustered. After a few more insults, Napoleon walked away.
Talleyrand slowly crossed the room, moving with his characteristic limp.
As an attendant helped him with his cloak, he turned to his fellow ministers
(all afraid they would never see him again), and said, “What a pity, gentle
men, that so great a man should have such bad manners.”
Despite his anger, Napoleon Hid not arrest his foreign minister. He
merely relieved him of his duties d banished him from the court, believing that for this man humiliation would be punishment enough. He did not
realize that word had quickly spread ofhis tirade—of how the emperor had
completely lost control of himself, and how Talleyrand had essentially humiliated him by maintaining his composure and dignity. A page had been
turned: For the first time people had seen the great emperor lose his cool
under fire. A feeling spread that he was on the way down. As Talleyrand
later said, “This is the beginning of the end.”
Interpretation
This was indeed the beginning of the end. Waterloo was still six years
ahead, but Napoleon was on a slow descent to defeat, ciystallizing in 1812
with his disastrous invasion of Russia. Talleyrand was the first to see the
signs ofhis decline, especially in the irrational war with Spain. Sometime in
1808, the minister decided that for the future peace of Europe, Napoleon
had to go. And so he conspired with Fouché.
It is possible that the conspiracy was never anything more than a
ploy~—a device to push Napoleon over the edge. For it is hard to believe
that two of the most practical men in history would only go halfway in their
plotting. They may have been only stirring the waters, trying to goad
Napoleon into a misstep. And indeed, what they got was the tarrtmrn that
laid out his loss of control for all to see. In fact, Napoleorfs soon—famous
blowup that afternoon had a profoundly negative effect on his public
image.
This is the problem with the angry response. At first it may strike fear
and terror, but only in some, and as the days pass and the storm clears,
other responses erne:ge—embar1:assment and uneasiness about the
shouter’s capacity for going out of control, and resentment of what has
been said. Losing your temper, you always make unfair and exaggerated
accusations. A few such tirades and people are counting the days until you
are gone.
In the face of a
conspiracy against him, a
conspiracy between his two
most important ministers, Napoleon certainly had a
right to feel angry and
anxious. But by responding so angrily, and so publicly, he only demonstrated his frustration. To show your frustration is to show that you have
lost your power to shape events; it is the helpless action ofthe child who resorts to a hysterical fit to get his way. The powerful never reveal this kind of
weakness.
There were a number ofthings Napoleon could have done in this situ~
alien. He could have thought about the fact that two eminently sensible
men had had reason to turn against him, and could have listened and
learned from them. He could have tried to win them back to him. He could
even have gotten rid of them, making their imprisonment or dead; an ominous display of his power. No tirades, no childish fits, no embarrassing
afler-elfects—just a quiet and definitive severing of ties.
Remember: Tantrums neither intimidate nor inspire loyalty. They
only create doubts and uneasiness about your power. Exposing your weak’
ness, these stormy eruptions often herald a. fall.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
By the late 1920s, Haile Selassie had nearly achieved his goal of assuming
total control over Ethiopia, a
country he felt needed strong and unified
leadership. As regent to the empress Zauditu (stepdaughter of the late
queen) and heir to the throne, Selassie had spent several years weakening
the power ofEthiopia’s various warlords. Now only one real obstacle stood
easily see whether Iris
t‘()I1l}lU.$'I1f(’ was ruffled
or not by looking ax the
tea. wizich would not
fall evenly ground to
the proper carlsislency
iflrc go! excited. And
so /‘usllm was (lone
impartially and ptmplfl
wml away from his
court .raIi.sfz‘ed.
CHA-N0-YU:
we w-Auwsr». "rm
L'l§RlZM()NY
A. L. SADLER.
l962
1}’/m.s'.\‘lblv, no animatl‘tyslmu1rt he felt for
rznymw. . , . To speak
angrily to ll person, to
show your hatred by
what you my or by the
way you look, Lr an
!lIlIlL‘C(‘S.i‘aIy proceedi):g-dangerorrs. fool»
£312, rtrlicrllous, and
vulgar.
A rrger or hatred xhoul'rr'
Izever be show; other»
wise than in what you
do; and feelings will be
all the more effective in
action, in so far as you
avoid the exhibition of
them in any other way.
It is only the coldblvorlell arlinmlx whose
bile is pui.s'mIr)u.r.
Am‘n1;n
S\“Ilf)l’F,NliAlJFR,
1 78244 860
LAW 39 327
Tlll" \14):'\|\'l".Y :\Nl)
lllll‘. \XV\Sl’
A monkey. whilst
munching a ripe pear.
was pcslered by the
l7(lf€r_ffl(?€{l imporruml
lies ofu wasp, who,
noims vnlens. would
have :1 part. After
threatening the monkey
with his anger rfize
further hesitated to
submit to his derrmmi,
he .\‘4'tfl(’(l on the fruit.
but was as 3‘Or)n
knocked ofI
by
the
nwnkey.
The irritable wasp now
hurl recourse to in vectiv(:—»and, after using
the most imuliing
language. which the
other calmly listened
to, he so worker!
lximselfup irim violmr
passion that, losing all
consideration oftlw
yenally, he flew to the
face ofthe monkey.
and slung him with
such rage that he was
unable do extricate his
weapon, and was
compelled to tear
himself away. leaving it
in the wound-—thus
4-nfaclirzg on himself a
lingering death. accom»
partied hy pm‘:25 much
greater than rhose he
had t".-zflicled.
FAB! [753
JoN.\TH.«:~: Biscu.
1783 1847
32.8 LAW 39
in his way: the empress and her husband, Ras Gugsa. Selassie knew the
royal couple hated him and wanted to get rid of him, so to cut short their
plotting he made Gugsa the governor of the northern province of
Begemeder, forcing him to leave the capital, where the empress lived.
For several years Gugsa played the loyal administrator. But Selassie
did not trust him: He knew that Gugsa and the empress were plotting revenge. As time passed and Gugsa made no move, the chances of a plot
only increased. Selassie knew what he had to do: draw Gugsa out, get
under his skin, and push him into action before he was ready.
For several years, a northern tribe, the Azebu Gallas, had been in vir»
tual rebellion against the throne, robbing and pillaging local villages and
refusing to pay taxes. Selassie had done nothing to stop them, letting them
grow stronger. Finally, in 1929, he ordered Ras Gugsa to lead an anny
against these disobedient tfibesmen. Gugsa agreed, but inwardly he
seethed--he had no gmdge against the Azebu Gallas, and the demand that
he fight them hurt his pride. He could not disobey the order, but as he
worked to put together an army, he began to spread an ugly rumor«-that
Selassie was in cahoois with the pope, and planned to convert the country
to Roman Catholicism and make it a colony ofItaly. Gugsifs army swelled,
and some of the tribes from which its soldiers came secretly agreed to fight
Selassie. In March of 1930 an enormous force of 35,000 men began to
march, not on the Azebu Gallas but souih, toward the capital of Addis
Ababa. Made confident by his growing strength, Gugsa. now openly led a
holy war to depose Selassie and put the country back in the hands of true
Christians.
He did not see the trap that had been laid for him. Before Selassie had
ordered Gugsa to fight the Azebu Gallas, he had secured the support of the
Ethiopian church. And before the revolt got underway, he had bribed several of Gugsa’s key allies not to show up for battle. As the rebel army
marched south, airplanes flew overhead dropping leaflets announcing that
the highest church officials had recognized Selassie as the tme Christian
leader ofEthiopia, and that they had excommunicated Gugsa for fomenting a civil war. These leaflets severely blunted the emotions behind the
holy crusade. And as battle loomed and the support that Gugsa’s allies had
promised him failed to show up, soldiers began to flee or defect.
When the battle came, the rebel army quicky collapsed. Refusing to
surrender, Ras Gugsa was killed in the fighting. The empress, distraught
over her l1usba.nd’s death, died a few days later. On April 80, Selassie issued a formal proclamation announcing his new title: Emperor of Ethiopia.
Interpretation
Haile Selassie always saw several moves ahead. He knew that if he let Ras
Gugsa decide the time and place of the revolt, the danger would be much
greaier than ifhe forced Gngsa to act on Selassie’s terms. So he goaded him
into rebellion by offending his manly pride, asking him to fight people he
had no quarrel with on behalf of a man he hated. Thinking everything out
ahead, Selassie made sure that Gugsa’s rebellion would come to nothing,
and that he could use it to do away with his last two enemies.
This is the essence of the Law: When the waters are still, your oppo~
nents have the time and space to plot actions that they will initiate and com
trol. So stir the waters, force the fish to the surface, get them to act before
they are ready, steal the initiative. The best way to do this is to play on uncontrollable emotions—-pride, vanity, love, hate. Once the water is stirred
up, the little fish cannot help but rise to the bait. The angrier they become,
the less control they have, and finally they are caught in the whirlpool you
have made, and they drown.
A sovereign should never launch an army out ofanger.
a leader should never start a war out ofurrath.
Sun-zzu, fourth cmlury .li.C.
KEYS TO POWER
Angry people usually end up looking ridiculous, for their response seems
out of proportion to what occasioned it. They have taken things too seriously, exaggerating the hurt or insult that has been done to them. They are
so sensitive to slight that it becomes comical how much they take person~
ally. More comical still is their belief that their outbursts signify power: The
truth is the opposite: Fetulance is not power, it is a sign of helplessness.
People may temporarily be cowed by your tantrums, but in the end they
lose respect for you. They also realize they can easily undermine a
person
with so little selflcontrol.
The answer, however, is not to repress our angry or emotional re
sponses. For repression drains us of energy and pushes us into strange behavior. lnstead we have to change our perspective: We have to realize that
nothing in the social realm, and in the game of power, is personal.
Everyone is caught up in a chain of events that long predates the present moment. Our anger often stems from problems in our childhood,
from the problems of our parents which stem from their own childhood, on
and on. Our anger also has roots in the many interactions with others, the
accumulated disappointments and heartaches that we have suffered. An individual will often appear as the instigator of our anger but it is much more
complicated, goes far beyond what that individual did to us. If a
person explodes with anger at you (and it seems out ofproportion to what you did to
them), you must remind yourselfthat it is not exclusively directed at you-—
do not be so vain. The cause is much larger, goes way bad: in time, involves dozens of prior hurts, and is actually not worth the bother to
understand. Instead of seeing it as a personal grudge, look at the emotional
outburst as a disguised power move, an attempt to control or punish you
cloaked in the form of hurt feelings and anger.
This shift of perspective will let you play the game of power with more
clarity and energy. Instead of overreasting, and becoming ensnared in pet)»
DlT(2!l llllill l'Rll’s'l'
Kirfyo. an officer ofrhe
Second’ rank, had a
brwher called the High
Priest Ryogaku, an
extremely badlempered mam. Next to
his monastery grew :2
large nettle-tree which
octrafloned the ruckrmme people gave him,
the Nertletrze High
Priest. “Thar name is
outrageous,
”
ruin? the
high priest, and cut
down the me. The
stump still being left.
people referred to him
now as the Slump High
Priest. More furious
than ever, Ryogaku had
the rmmp dug up and
thrown away, but this
left (1 big ditch. People
now called him the
Ditch High Priest.
ESSAYS IN xnrerzrsss.
Kr,NK<'>,
lA!’AN,
i«'<'n.=R1ne,>:m rir,.~2rmw
LAW 39 329
330 LAW 39
ple’s emotions, you will turn their loss of control to your advantage: You
keep your head while they are losing theirs.
During an important battle in the War of the Three Kingdoms, in the
third century A.D., advisers to the commander Ts’ao Ts’ao discovered docu»
ments showing that certain of his generals had conspired with the enemy,
and urged him to arrest and execute them. Instead he ordered the documents burned and the matter forgotten. At this critical moment in the battle, to get upset or demand justice would have reverberated against him:
An angry action would have called attention to the generals’ disloyalty,
which would have harmed the troops’ morale. justice could wait-he
would deal with the generals in time. Ts‘ao Ts’ao kept his head and made
the right decision.
Compare this to Napoleon's response to Talleyrand: Instead of taking
the conspiracy personally, the emperor should have played the game like
Ts’ao Ts’ao, carefully weighing the consequences of any action he took.
The more powerful response in the end would have been to ignore Tal~
leyr-and, or to bring the minister gradually back to his side and punish him
later.
Anger only cuts off our options, and the powerful cannot thrive with
out options. Once you train yourself not to take matters personally, and to
control your emotional responses, you will have placed yourself in a position oftremendous power: Now you can play with the emotional responses
of other people. Stir the insecure into action by impugning their manhood,
and by dangling the prospect of an easy victory before their faces. Do as
Houdini did when challenged by the less successful escape artist Kleppini:
Reveal an apparent weakness (Houdini let Kleppini steal the combination
for a pair of cuffs) to hire your opponent into action. Then you can beat
him with ease. With the arrogant too you can appear weaker than you are,
taunting them into a rash action.
Sun Pin, commander of the armies of Ch’i and loyal disciple of Suntzu, once led his troops against the armies ofWei, which outnumbered him
two to one. “Let us light a hundred thousand fires when our army enters
Wei,” suggested Sun Pin, “fifty thousand on the next day, and only thirty
thousand on the third.” On the third day the Wei general exclaimed, “I
knew the men of Ch’i were cowards, and after only three days more than
half of them have deserted!” So, leaving behind his slow-moving heavy in
fantry, the general decided to seize the moment and move swiftly on the
Ch’i camp with a
lightly armed force. Sun Pin’s troops retreated, luring
Wei’s army into a narrow pass, where they ambushed and destroyed them.
With the Wei general dead and his forces decimated, Sun Pin now easily
defeated the rest of his army.
In the face of a hot—headed enemy, finally, an excellent response is no
response. Follow the Talleyrand tactic: Nothing is as infuriating as a man
who keeps his cool while others are losing theirs. If it will work to your advantage to unsettle people, affect the aristocratic, bored pose, neither
mocking nor triumphant but simply indifferent. This will light their fuse.
When they embarrass themselves with a
temper tantrum, you will have
gained several victories, one ofthese being that in the face of their childishness you have maintained your dignity and composure.
Image: The Pond of Fish. The waters
are clear and calm, and the fish are well below the surface.
Stir the waters and they emerge. Stir it some more and they get
angry, rising to the surface, biting whatever comes nearincluding a
freshly baited hook.
Authority: If your opponent is of a hot temper. try to irritate him. If he
is arrogant, try to encourage his egotism, . . . One who is skilled at
making the enemy move does so by creating a situation according to
which the enemy will act; he entices the enemy with something he is
ccxtajn to take. He keeps the enemy on the move by holding out bait
and then attacks him with picked troops. (Sun—tzu, fourth century 15.0.)
REVERSAL
When playing with people’s emotions you have to be careful. Study the
enemy beforehand: Some fish are best left at the bottom of the pond.
The leaders of the city of Tyre, capital of ancient Phoenicia, felt confldent they could withstand Alexander the Great, who had conquered the
Oiient but had not attacked their city, which stood well protected on the
water. They sent ambassadors to Alexander saying that although they
would recognize him as emperor they would not allow him or his forces to
enter Tyre. This of course enraged him, and he immediately mounted a
siege. For four months the city withstood him, and finally he decided that
the struggle was not worth it, and that he would come to terms with the
Tyrians. But they, feeling that they had already baited Alexander and gotten away with it, and confident that they could withstand him, refused to
LAW 39 331
332 E LAW 39
negotiate«—-in. fact they killed his messengers,
This pushed Alexander over the edge. Now it did not matter to him
how long the siege lasted or how large an army it needed; he had the resources, and would do whatever it took He remounted his assault so sirenuously that he captured Tyre within days, burned it to the ground, and sold
its people into slavery.
You can bait the powerful and get them to commit and divide their
forces as Sun Pin did, but test the waters first. Find the gap in their strength.
If there is no gap--if they are impossibly strong——you have nothing to gain
and everything to lose by provoking them. Choose carefully whom you
bait, and never stir up the sharks.
Finally there are times when a we1l—timed burst of anger can do you
good, but your anger must be manufactured and under your control. Then
you can determine exactly how and on whom it will fall. Never stir up re
actions that will work against you in the long run. And use your thunder
bolts rarely, to make them the more intimidating and meaningful. Whether
purposefully staged or not, if your outbursts come too often, they will lose
their power.
LAW
40
DESPISE THE
FREE LUNCH
JUDGMENT
What is offemdforfiee is dangerous-—-—z‘t usually involves
either (1: trick or a hidden obligation. What has worth is
worth paying for. By paying your own way you stay
clear ofgmtitude, guilt, and deceit. It is also often wise
to pay lhefnll ;:1rice~—-there is nu cutting cmnm with excellence. Be lavish with your money and keep it circulating, for generosity is a sign and a magnet for
[Iowa/.
333
|ll'l(l|-'.|)'H «HI RI,
Many wmk-numlezl
per.x*mn‘ in cities hope
in dis(‘r)I»‘e1' properly
nmicr tho xurfare oflhe
mnh and m make
some profit from It. In
the Mugltrib there are
many Serber
“.rrudnzIs"‘ wlm art:
unable to rnakz’ a
living
by natural ways and
means‘, They uppmach
we?!-to-zio peopfe with
papers that have mm
margins and rmzfain
rilhcr non/Amine’ writ»
ing or what they claim
to he (hr llanxlaticm of
u docu/new wmten by
the owner 0/lmricrl
a‘reo.mrtm', giving the‘
clue to the hiding plum
In this way. they try to
get their suszenurxce by
[persuuafing the well»
m-do] to semi rhem our
to dig and humfor
treasure. ()ccusimm[ly.
une of these tremmru
hunters displays
strange informatio.-1 or
some remarkable trick
afmagic will: which he
frmls people into
believing his’ ollzvr
1:/zzims‘. although,
in fact. he kmmhs
nothing nfmugic and
its pIor:¢'dure.\. . . .
The tlzings that haw
been saitt about /mmsure.’ hunting] have no
scientffit: Imvis, nor are
they hosed upon
[factual] iufnrmamm.
Ir shrmld be realized
that although treasures
are found. this happens
rarely and by chance,
not by .\‘_v.s’lemau'<;
seurth. . . . Those who
are dt?ll.i(lé'i’/l or afflizrled
by [how thmgs nun!
(aka refuge in Gm?
LAW 4 0
MONEY AND POWER
In the realm of power, everything must be judged by its cost, and everything has a price. What is offered for free or at bargain rates often comes
with a. psychological pn’ce tag—-complicated feelings of obligation, compromises with quality, the insecurity those compromises bring, on and on.
The powerful learn early to protect their most valuable resources: independence and room to maneuver. By paying the full price, they keep themselves free of dangerous entanglements and worries.
Being open and flexible with money also teaches the value of strategic
generosity, a variation on the old trick of “giving when you are about to
take.” By giving the appropriate gift, you put the recipient under obligation. Generosity softens people up——to be deceived. By gaining a
reputation for liberality, you win people’: admiration while distracting them from
your power plays. By strategically spreading your wealth, you charm the
other courtiers, creating pleasure and making valuable allies.
Look at the masters of power——the Caesars, the Queen Elizabeths, the
Michelangelos, the Mecljcis: Not a miser among them. Even the great con
artists spend freely to swindle. Tight purse strings are unattractive——when
engaged in seduction, Casanova would give completely not only of himself
but of his wallet. The powerful understand that money is psychologically
charged, and that it is also a vessel of politeness and sociability. They make
the human side of money a weapon in their armory.
For everyone able to play with money, thousands more are locked in a
self-destructive refusal to use money creatively and strategically. These
types represent the opposite pole to the powerful, and you must learn to
recognize them-——either to avoid their poisonous natures or to turn their inflexibility to your advantage:
The Greedy Fish. The greedy fish take the human side out of money.
Cold and ruthless, they see only the lifeless balance sheet; viewing others
solely as either pawns or obstructions in their pursuit of wealth, they trample on people’s sentiments and alienate valuable allies. No one wanis to
work with the greedy fish, and over the years they end up isolated, which
ofien proves their undoing.
Greedy fish are the con a.rtist’s bread and butter: Lured by the bait of
easy money, they swallow the ruse hook, line, and sinker. They are easy to
deceive, for they spend so much time dealing with numbers (not with peer
ple) that they become blind to psychology, including their own. Either
avoid them before they exploit you or play on their greed to your gain.
The Bargain Demon. Powerful people judge everything by what it costs,
not just in money but in time, dignity, and peace of mind. And this is ex»
actly what Bargain Demons cannot do. Wasting valuable time digging for
bargains, they worry endlessly about what they could have gotten else
where for a little less. On top of that, the bargain item they do buy is often
shabby; perhaps it needs costly repairs, or will have to be replaced twice as
fast as a high-quality item. The costs of these pursuits-——not always in
money (though the price of a bargain is often deceptive) but in time and
peace of mind—discoura.ge normal people from undertaking them, but for
the Bargain Demon the bargain is an end in itself.
These types might seem to harm only themselves, but their attitudes
are contagious: Unless you resist them they will infect you with the inse~
cure feeling that you should have looked harder to find a cheaper price.
Don’t argue with them or try to change them. just mentally add up the
cost, in time and inner peace if not in hidden financial expense, of the irrational pursuit of a bargain.
The Sadist. Financial sadists play vicious power games with money as a
way of asserting their power. They might, for example, make you wait for
money that is owed you, promising you that the check is in the mail. Or if
they hire you to work for them, they meddle in every aspect of the job,
haggling and giving you ulcers. Sadists seem to think that paying for some
thing gives them the right to torture and abuse the seller. They have no
sense of the couriier element in money. If you are unlucky enough to get
involved with this type, accepting a financial loss may be better in the long
run than getting entangled in their destructive power games.
The Indiscriminate Giver. Generosity has a definite function in power:
It attracts people, softens them up, makes allies out ofthem. But it has to be
used strategically, with a. definite end in mind. Indiscriminate Givers, on
the other hand, are generous because they want to be loved and admired
by all. And their generosity is so indiscriminate and needy that it may not
have the desired effect: Ifthey give to one and all. why should the recipient
feel special? Attractive as it may seem to make an Indiscriminate Giver
your mark, in any involvement with this type you will often feel burdened
by their insatiable emotional needs.
TRANSGRESSIONS OF THE LAW
Transgression I
After Francisco Pizarro conquered Peru, in 1532, gold from the Incan Empire began to pour into Spain, and Spaniards of all classes started dreaming
of the instant riches to be had in the New World. The story soon spread of
an Indian chief to the east of Peru who once each year would ritually cover
himself in gold dust and dive into a lake. Soon word ofmouth transformed
El Damrio, the “Golden Man,” into an empire called El Dorado, wealthier
than the Incan, where the streets were paved and the buildings inlaid with
gold. This elaboration of the story did not seem implausible, for surely a
chief who could afiord to waste gold dust in a lake must rule a golden empire. Soon Spaniards were searching for El Dorado all over northern South
America.
from their aizubility it}
make a Iiviizg and their
laziness’ in this impact.
They should not
occupy IheIn.wIves' with
abSuI'dl'lir:.s' and untrue
vtnrirs.
THE MUDADDIMAH.
hm KHAi,i>17~N.
1332-1406
Tiili Ml2~.F.R
A mixer, (0 make sun:
ofllis properly, S0111 all
(ha! he had and
converted it into a great
lump ofgvld, which he
hill in a hole in the
ground, and went
cominuully [(1 viii: and
inspect it. This tamed
the curiosity of one of
his workmen, who,
suxpecting that there
was a treasure, when
his marreriv back was
Iurncd, wan! to the
spot, and rrole it away.
When the mixer
returned and formal Jim
place empty. he wept
and tore his hair. But a
mzighbor who saw him
in this extravagant
grief: and learned the
cause ofil, raid: “Frrl
rhymlfno longer, but
lake or stone and put ii
in the same place. and
think that it is your
lump ofgolri;/"or. as
you never meant to use
it, the one will do _\'au
as much good as the
other."
The worth of money is‘
no! in its pnsscrsiorz,
but in its use.
FABI es.
/\I§S0l’.
SIXTH ci:.\n'uRv s.c.
LAW 4 0 335
336
There is a popular
saving in Japan that
goer “Tada yori takai
mono wa nai." meaning: "Nothing is’ more
costly than xnmetliing
given fret" of charge. "
TH1: UNSPOKEN wmr.
Ml(‘H|HlR0
lvlA'l'SHM()T().
1988
MU'\F.Y
Yusuf lbn Jafar elAltlutli user! to lake
sums of money, sometimes very large ones,
from those who canto
to study with him.
A distinguished legalist
visiting him once said:
“I am enchanted and
impressed by your
teachings, and I am
sure that you are
directing your disciples
in a proper munner.
But it is not in accordance with tradition to
take money for knowledge. Besides, the
action is open to rinsinterprelatiun.
"
El-Amudi said: “I have
never sold any knowledge. Then: is no
money on earth sufficient to pay for it. As
/or misinterpretation,
the abstaining from
taking money will not
prevent it, for it will
find some other object.
Rather should you
know that a man who
takes money may be
greedy for money, or
he may not. But a man
who takes nothing at
all is under the gravest
LAW 40
In February of 1541, the largest expedition yet in this venture, led by
Piza.rr0’s brother Gonzalo, left Quito, in Ecuador. Resplendent in their armors and colorful silks, 340 Spaniards headed east, along with 4,000 Indians to carry supplies and serve as scouts, 4,000 swine, dozens of llamas,
and close to 1,000 dogs. But the expedition was soon hit by torrential rain,
which rotted its gear and spoiled its food. Meanwhile, as Gonzalo Pizarro
questioned the Indians they met along the way, those who seemed to be
withholding information, or who had not even heard of the fabulous kingdom, he would torture and feed to the dogs. Word of the Spaniards’ murderousness spread quickly among the Indians, who realized that the only
way to avoid Gonzalds wrath was to make up stories about El Dorado
and send him as far away as possible. As Gonzalo and his men followed
the leads the Indians gave them, then, they were only led farther into deep
jungle.
The explorers’ spirits sagged. Their uniforms had long since shredded;
their armor rusted and they threw it away; their shoes were torn to pieces,
forcing them to walk barefoot; the Indian slaves they had set out with had
either died or deserted them; they had eaten not only the svsnne but the
hunting dogs and llamas. They lived on roots and fruit. Realizing that they
could not continue this way, Pizarro decided to risk river travel, and a
barge was built out of rotting wood. But the journey down the treacherous
Napo River proved no easier. Setting up camp on the n‘ver’s edge, Gonzalo
sent scouts ahead on the barge to find Indian settlements with food. He
waited and waited for the scouts to return, only to find out they had decided to desert the expedition and continue down the river on their own.
The rain continued without end. Gonzalo’s men forgot about El Dorado; they wanted only to return to Quito. Finally, in August of 1542, a little over a hundred men, from an expedition originally numbering in the
thousands, managed to find their way back. To the residents of Quito they
seemed to have emerged from hell itself, wrapped in tatters and skins, their
bodies covered in sores, and so emaciated as to be unrecognizable. For
over a
year and a half they had marched in an enormous circle, two thousand miles by foot. The vast sums of money invested in the expedition had
yielded nothing-—no sign ofEl Dorado and no sign of gold.
interpretation
Even after Gonzalo Pizano’s disaster, the Spaniards launched expedition
after expedition in Search of El Dorado. And like Pizarro the conquistadors
would burn and loot villages, torture Indians, endure unimaginable hardships, and get no closer to gold. The money they spent on such expeditions
cannot be calculated; yet despite the futility of the search, the lure of the
fantasy endured.
Not only did the search for El Dorado cost millions of lives——both In»
dian and Spanish—it helped bring the ruin of the Spanish empire. Gold became Spain’s obsession. The gold that did find its way back to Spain——and
a lot clid~—was reinvested in more expeditions, or in the purchase of luxuries, rather than in agriculture or any other productive endeavor. Whole
Spanish towns were depopulated as their menfolk left to hunt gold. Farms
fell into min, and the army had no recruits for its European wars. By the
end of the seventeenth century, the entire country had shrunk by more
than half of its population; the city of Madrid had gone from a population
of 400,000 to 150,000. With diminishing returns from its efforts over so
many years, Spain fell into a decline from which it never recovered.
Power requires selfidiscipline. The prospect of wealth, particularly
easy, sudden wealth, plays havoc with the emotions. The suddenly rich be
lieve that more is always possible. The free lunch, the money that will fall
into your lap, is just around the corner.
In this delusion the greedy neglect everything power really depends
on: self-control, the goodwill of others, and so on. Understand: With one
exception—death--no lasting change in fortune comes quickly. Sudden
wealth rarely lasts, for it is built on nothing solid. Never let lust for money
lure you out of the protective and enduring fortress of real power. Make
power your goal and money will find its way to you. Leave El Dorado for
suckers and fools.
Transgression ll
In the early eighteenth century, no one stood higher in English society
than the Duke and Duchess of Marlborough. The duke, having led sue»
cessful campaigns against the French, was considered Europe’s premier
general and strategist. And his wife, the duchess, after much maneuvering,
had established herself as the favorite of Queen Anne, who became ruler
of England in 1702. In 1704 the duke’s triumph at the Battle of Blenheim
made him the toast of England, and to honor him the queen awarded him
a
large plot of land in the town of Woodstock, and the funds to create a
great palace there. Calling his planned home the Palace of Blenheim, the
duke chose as his architect the young john Vanbrugh, a kind of Renaissance man who wrote plays as well as designed buildings. And so con—
struction began, in the summer of 1705, with much fanfare and great
hopes.
Vanbrugh had a dramatist’s sense of architecture. His palace was to be
a monument to Mar1borough’s brilliance and power, and was to include
artificial lakes, enormous bridges, elaborate gardens, and other fantastical
touches. From day one, however, the duchess could not be pleased: She
thought Vanbrugh was wasting money on yet another stand of trees; she
wanted the palace finished as soon as possible. The duchess tortured Van~
brugh and his workmen on every detail. She was consumed with petty
matters; although the government was paying for Blenheim, she counted
every penny. Eventually her grumbling, about Blenheim and other things
too, created an irreparable rift between her and Queen Anne, who, in 1711,
dismissed her from the court, ordering her to vacate her apartments at the
royal palace. When the duchess left (fuming over the loss of her position,
and also of her royal salary), she emptied the apartment of every fixture
down to the brass doorknobs.
Over the next ten years, work on Blenheim would stop and start, as
the funds became harder to procure from the government. The duchess
suspicion ofrubbing
the disciple of his soul.
People who say, ’I take
Imtliing,’ may be found
lo take away the vol!»
tion. of their victim. "
Tl-Hi I)I<RMlS Pl{()Bli,
IDRIES SHAH,
I970
'I‘llli W/\,’\ \Xll()
l.U\’l‘\l) 5/lll\l§\ l‘ll7["l‘l7.ll
TIMTV l.Il"lz
In ancient tiinzrs tlmre
was an old wondculter
who wont to the mounIuin (IlII1()SY ewry day
to cm wood.
It wL1.s‘.\'1/zirl that this old
man was a miser who
hoarderl his silver until
it changed to gold. and
that llf! carter/I rnorefor
gold than anything «Ire
in all the world.
One day (1 wilderrw5.\‘
tiger sprang or him and
Ilzough he run he multl
not escape, and the
tiger carried him 0/fin
its mouth.
T/m wor>rl¢'urtz-,r's mu.
Saw lziyfatheris’ (lunger,
and ran to save him if
pox.s'zl)le. He can rial a
long kmfe, and as he
(‘OIll(l run fu.s'Irr than
the tiger. who had 11
man 442 mrry, he won
overtook them.
Hr"; father was not
nmrh hurt, /or the Iiger
held him by his clothes;
When the old wm)1l<'uI—
ter raw lm you about In
rmb the tiger he ('allr2(1
out m great alarm:
"Do not spoil the
/igcriv skin! Do not
.\'[I0il the rigmfr skin! If
you can kill him without cutting holes in his
LAW 40 337
skin We can gel many
pieces ofsilver for it
Kill him, but do nu! ma!
his body.
While the mm was
listening (0 Iiirfallizeris‘
imrrucrtiorw the tiger
.mr1d(mly dmvhed 0/]
into the forest, carrying
the old mun where the
.\“(m could not reach
him, (mil he was soon
killed.
“Cnwr-‘st; mete."
vmuous i-ABLEX
FROM V/\Kl()l.S PLACES.
Dome Di PRl.\vlr\. L0,,
E963
TIIIC l~"I(ll€V HI‘ \«1H.\| is
'\.\|) I’ll‘\Itr\UlI
It is wrimm in the
hl.S‘I()fi¢.\' u
f
the
proplzcxs iizal Moses
was sent to Plturuoh
with many nziraciex,
wonders and iionorsz
Now the daily ration
for Plumzm'z 3' rafrle was
4,000 sheep. 400 rows,
200 annrlr. am? (1
mrmsponding amount
0/‘rlzic/cm.\‘. firk. hover‘
(1g<’.V‘.fI'i(‘([ m(:at.\‘,
.‘1'W('L"I.)‘, and other
I/tings. All the people of
lf,i,'_Vpl and all his army
user! to eat at his (able
every day. For 400
yerlrs lw hail rt/ainurd
divinity and newrr
L‘eu.\‘ad providing this‘
food.
When Mtmw praycd.
.w1}'izxg. “O Lorri.
zlesiroy I’/zararziz,
"
Goo‘
tltimverezl his prayer
tmrl mid. “I mail
a‘€_s'tr¢)y him in warez.
and I shall bexmw ail
his wealth am! that of
his soldiers‘ on you and
your prllp/c’,\‘. "
Szrwrul
33%‘ LAW 4 o
thought Vanbrugh was out to ruin her. She quibbled over every carload of
stone and bushel of lime, counted every extra yard of iron railing or foot of
wainscot, hurling abuse at the wasteful workmen, contractors, and surveyors. Marlborough, old and weaiy, wanted nothing more than to settle into
the palace in his last years, but the project became bogged down in a
swamp of litigation, the workmen suing the duchess for wages, the duchess
suing the architect right back. In the midst of this interminable wrangling,
the duke died. He had never spent a night in his beloved Blenheim.
After Ma.rlborough’s death, it became clear that he had a vast estate,
worth over £2 million—-more than enough to pay for finishing the palace.
But the duchess would not relent: She held back Vanbrugh’s wages as well
as the workmerfs, and finally had the architect dismissed. The man who
took his place finished Blenheim in a few years, following Vanbruglfs designs to the letter. Vanbrugh died in 1726, locked out of the palace by the
duchess, unable to set foot in his greatest creation. Foreshadowing the romantic movement, Blenheim had started a whole new trend in architecture, but had given its creator a
twenty—year nightmare.
Interpretation
For the Duchess of Marlborough, money was a way to play sadistic power
games. She saw the loss of money as a symbolic loss of power. With Vanbrugh her contortions went deeper still: He was a great artist, and she en~
vied his power to create, to attain a fame outside her reach. She may not
have had his gifts, but she did have the money to torture and abuse him
over the pettiest details—to ruin his life.
This kind of sadism, however, bears an awful price. It made construe»
tion that should have lasted ten years take twenty. It poisoned many a relationship, alienated the duchess from the court. deeply pained the duke
(who wanted only to live peacefully in Blenheim), created endless lawsuits,
and took years offVanbruglfs life. Finally, too, posterity had the last word:
Vanbrugh is recognized as a genius while the duchess is forever remem«
bered for her consummate cheapness.
The powerful must have grandeur of spirit»-they can never reveal any
petfiness. And money is the most visible arena in which to display either
grandeur or pettiness. Best spend freely, then, and create a
reputation for
generosity, which in the end will pay great dividends. Never let financial
details blind you to the bigger picture of how people perceive you. Their
resentment will cost you in the long run. And if you want to meddle in the
work of creative people under your hire, at least pay them well. Your
money will buy their submission better than your displays ofpower.
OBSERVANCES OF THE LAW
Observance I
Pietro Aretino, son of a
lowly shoemaker, had catapulted himselfinto fame
as a writer of biting satires. But like every Renaissance artist, he needed to
find a patron who would give him a comfortable lifestyle while not inter
fering with his work. In 1528 Aretino decided to attempt a new strategy in
the patronage game. Leaving Rome, he established himself in Venice,
where few had heard of him. He had a fair amount of money he had managed to save, but little else. Soon after he moved into his new home, however, he flirew open its doors to rich and poor, regaling them with
banquets and amusements. He befriended each and every gondolier, tipping them royally. In the streets, he spread his money liberally, giving it
away to beggars, orphans, Washerwomen. Among the city’s commoners,
word quickly spread that Aretino was more than just a
great writer, he was
a man of power—-a kind of lord.
Artists and men of influence soon began to frequent Areu‘no’s house.
Within a few years he made himself a celebrity; no visiting dignitary would
think of leaving Venice without paying him a call. His generosity had cost
him most of his savings, but had bought him influence and a good name—
a cornerstone in the foundation of power. Since in Renaissance Italy as
elsewhere the ability to spend freely was the privilege of the rich, the arisv
tocracy thought Aretino had to be a man of influence, since he spent
money like one. And since the influence of a man of influence is worth
buying, Aretino became the recipient of all sorts of gifts and moneys.
Dukes and duchesses, wealthy merchants, and popes and princes competed to gain his favor, and showered him with all kinds of presents.
Aretino’s spending habits, of course, were strategic, and the strategy
worked like a charm. But for real money and comfort he needed a great
patron’s bottomless pockets. Having surveyed the possibilities, he eventually set his sights on the extremely wealthy Marquis of Mantua, and wrote
an epic poem that he dedicated to the marquis. This was a common practice of writers looking for patronage: In exchange for a dedication they
would get a small stipend, enough to write yet another poem, so that they
spent their lives in a kind of constant servility. Aretino, however, wanted
power, not a measly wage. He might dedicate a poem to the marquis, but
he would offer it to him as a gift, implying by doing so that he was not a
hired hack looking for a stipend but that he and the marquis were equals.
Aret.ino’s gift-giving did not stop there: As a close friend of two of
Venice’s greatest artists, the sculptor Jacopo Sansovino and the painter
Titian, he convinced these men to participate in his gift-giving scheme.
Aretino had studied the marquis before going to work on him, and knew
his taste inside and out; he was able to advise Sansovirio and Titian what
subject matter would please the marquis most. When he then sent a Sansovino sculpture and a Titian painting to the marquis as gifts from all three of
them, the man was beside himself with joy.
Over the next few months, Aretino sent other gifts——swords, saddles,
the glass that was a Venetian specialty, things he knew the marquis prized.
Soon he, Titian, and Sansovino began to receive gifts from the marquis in
return. And the strategy went further: When the son-in—law of a friend of
Aretino’s found himself in jail in Mantua, Aretino was able to get the marquis to arrange his release. Aretinds friend, a wealthy merchant, was a
man of great influence in Venice; by turning the goodwill he had built up
your: pussrrrl by after
{his promlxe, and
Pharaoh, (loomed 10
min, rrnntinmrrl to live
in all his I?1agIl|fi(‘(!fl(,‘f’.
Mums’ u-as impulienl
for God to destroy
Plmruolz quickly, and
he could nor endure to
wail any longer. So he
V/listed for forty (lays
and went to Mount
Sinai, and in lzir
communing with god
he said, "0 Lord, Thou
didrr pVI)mtS£‘ (hut
Tlwu wouldst rlesrrov
Pharaoh, and Still he
has formkm none of
his hlrzsphenzies and
prr',t('n.vim1x. So when
Wlll Thou dc.\'lroy
him?"
A voice came from The
Truth xnyirig, “0
Moses, you wam Me to
destroy Pharaoh as
quickly as possilzle. but
a thousand times a
rlwuscmd of My
servants want Mt: never
(0 do so, b€(’IIIlSt' they
partake nflzis hmmty
and enjoy tranquillity
umlcr his rule. By My
power I swear that as
long as he provides
abunrlam‘ food and
comfort for My creatures, I shall not
destroy him
"
Moses said, "Then
when will Thy promixc
be fulfilled?" God mid,
“My promise will be
fulfilled wlmn he withholds lzis provisirm
from My creulzares, If
ever he begins Io larsrlrz
his bounty. lmow that
his hour is drawing
near.
"
It clmnrezl than one day
Plmmoh sazd to
Ihzmnzn, "Moses has
gmherell the Szms of
l.S'fl1l’.l1lb()Ill him and is
causing us rlixquiel. ll/I’
know nor what will be
LAW 40 339
the issue trfhls affurr
with us. We must keep
our stores full [eat at
any time we be without
resources. 50 we must
halve our daily ration:
and keep the saving in
reserve.
"
He deducted
2,000 sheep, 200 cows‘,
and ct I00 camels, and
sintilarly every two or
three days reduced the
ration. Moses then
know that the promise
of The Truth was near
tofulfillntenz. for excessive economy is Q sign
ofdecline and .1 bad
omen. The matters of
tradition say that on
rite day when Pharaoh
was drowned only two
ewes had been killed in
his kitchen.
Nothittg is better I/um
generosity. . . .
Ifa man
is rich and desires,
withouf a royal charter;
to act like a lord; ifize
wants men to humble
tiwrrwllvrrs before him,
10 revere him and call
him lord and prince,
then tell him every day
to spread a table with
vicluals. All those who
have acquired renown
in the world, have
gained it mainly
through hospitality,
while the miscrly and
twttriczous are despised
in both worlds,
THE BOOK or
GOVER.‘-‘MEN’? on
RULES Hm KINGS.
NtzAM AL—MuLK,
l:LEVI:N'l‘H (‘ENIURY
340 LAW 40
with the marquis to use, Aretino had now bought this man’s indebtedness,
too, and he in turn would help Aretino when he could. The circle of influence was growing wider. Time and again, Aretino was able to cash in on
the immense political power of the marquis, who also helped him in his
many court romances.
Eventually, however, the relationship became strained, as Aretino
came to feel that the marquis should have requited his generosity better.
But he would not lower himself to begging or whining: Since the exchange
of gifts between the two men had made them equals, it would not seem
right to bring up money. He simply withdrew from the marquis’s circle and
hunted for other wealthy prey, settling first on the French king Francis,
then the Medicis, the Duke of Urbino, Emperor Charles V, and more. In
the end, having many patrons meant he did not have to bow to any of
them, and his power seemed comparable to that of a great lord.
Interpretation
Aretino understood two fundamental properties of money: First, that it has
to circulate to bring power. What money should buy is not lifeless objects
but power over people. By keeping money in constant circulation, Aretino
bought an ever—expanding circle of influence that in the end more than
compensated him for his expenses.
Second, Aretino understood the key property of the gift. To give a gift
is to imply that you and the recipient are equals at the very least, or that
you are the recipient’s superior. A gift also involves an indebtedness or
obligation; when friends, for instance, offer you something for free, you
can be sure they expect something in return, and that to get it they are
making you feel indebted. (The mechanism may or may not be entirely
conscious on their paxt, but this is how it works.)
Aretino avoided such encumbrances on his freedom. Instead of acting
like a menial who expects the powerful to pay his way in life, he turned the
whole dynamic around; instead of being indebted to the powerful, he
made the powerful indebted to him. This was the point of his gift-giving, a
ladder that carried him to the highest social levels. By the end of his life he
had become the most famous writer in Europe.
Understand: Money may determine power relationships, but those relationships need not depend on the amount of money you have; they also
depend on the way you use it Powerful people give freely, buying influence rather them things. If you accept the inferior position because you
have no fortune yet, you may find yourself in it forever. Play the trick that
Aretino played on Ita.ly’s aristocracy: Imagine yourself an equal. Play the
lord, give freely, open your doors, circulate your money, and create the facade of power through an alchemy that transforms money into influence.
Observance II
Soon after Baron James Rothschild made his fortune in Paris in the early
1820s, he faced his most intractable problem: How could ajew and 3. Ger
man, a total outsider to French society, win the respect of the xenophobic
French upper classes? Rothschild was a man who understood power--—he
knew that his fortune would bring him status, but that if he remained so
cially alienated neither his status nor his fortune would last. So he looked at
the society of the time and asked what would win their hearts.
Charity? The French couldn’t care less. Political influence? He already
had that, and if anything it only made people more suspicious of him. The
one weak spot, he decided, was boredom. In the period of the restoration
of the monarchy, the French upper classes were bored. So Rothschild
began to spend astounding sums of money on entertaining them. He hired
the best architects in France to design his gardens and ballroom; he hired
Marie-Antoine Caréme, the most celebrated French chef, to prepare the
most lavish parties Paris had ever witnessed; no Frenchman could resist,
even if the parties were given by a German Jew. Rothschild’s weekly
soirées began to attract bigger and bigger numbers. Over the next few
years he won the only thing that would secure an outsider’s power: social
acceptance.
Interpretation
Strategic generosity is always a
great weapon in building a
support base,
particularly for the outsider. But the Baron de Rothschild was cleverer still:
He knew it was his money that had created the barrier between him and
the French, making him look ugly and untrustworthy. The best way to
overcome this was literally to waste huge sums, a gesture to show he valued
French culture and society over money. What Rothschild did resembled
die famous potlatch feasts of the American Northwest: By periodically destroying its wealth in a giant orgy of festivals and bonfires, an Indian tribe
would symbolize its power over other tribes. The base of its power was not
money but its ability to spend, and its confidence in a superiority that
would restore to it all that the potlatch had destroyed.
In the end, the baron’s soirées reflected his desire to mingle notjust in
France’s business world but in its society. By wasting money on his petlatches, he hoped to demonstrate that his power went beyond money into
the more precious realm of culture. Rothschild may have won social acceptance by spending money, but the support base he gained was one that
money alone could not buy. To secure his fortune he had to “waste” it. That
is strategic generosity in a nutshell——the ability to be flexible with your
wealth, putting it to work, not to buy objects, but to win people’s hearts.
Observance III
The Medicis of Renaissance Florence had built their immense power on
the fortune they had made in banking. But in Florence, centuries—old republic that it was, the idea that money bought power went against all the
city’s proud democratic Values. Cosimo de’ Medici, the first ofthe family to
gain great fame, worked around this by keeping a low profile. He never
flaunted his wealth. But by the time his grandson Lorenzo came of age, in
the 1470s, the family’s wealth was too large, and their influence we noticeable, to be disguised any longer.
Lorenzo solved the problem in his own way by developing the strategy of distraction that has served people of wealth ever since: He became
TH1-LI-l,'\MF-(1()l.()Hl~‘,l)
(ILOAK
During the Campaign
of Chmbyses in Egypt,
a great many Greeks
visited that country for
Oil? VCUSUU 07 another:
some, as was to be
expected, for (rude,
some to serve in the
army, others, no doubt,
out of mere curiosity, to
see what they could see.
Amongst the sighlseers
was Aeacer '5 son Sylvson, [lie exiled brother
of Polycralm of Samos.
While he was in Egypt,
Sylosun hat! my extraonlinary stroke ofluck:
he was hanging about
the streets of Memphis
rimrscd in u
flamerolored Cloak, when
Darius, who at (hat
time was a member of
Cambyxes '3 guard and
not yer of any particular importancri,
happened to catch
sight ofhim and, seized
with a sudden longing
to p0.rse.\*s the cloak,
came up to Syloson
and made him an offer
for It.
His extreme anxiety to
get it way obvious
enough to Syloson,
who was inspired to
say: “I am not sellmg
this for any money, but
ifyou must have it, I
will give it 10 youfor
free. "
Darius thereupon
thanked him warmly
and took it. Syloron at
the moment merely
thought he had lost it
by his fr>olis’h good
nature,‘ then came the
death of Camhyxes and
the revolt of the seven
against the Magus, and
Darius ascended the
throne. Sylavon now
LAW 40 347
hud the mews that the
man whose n*quN,\'t for
lll£’fltU7l£"-l.‘t1lU/t:‘(l cloak
he had formerly gratified in Egypt had
become king ofl’ar.s‘t'a.
Ile hutrietl tr) Sum. mt
down at the entrance of
the royal palttte, and
claimed to be incltttled
in the uflivial list ofther
kitigk henojatrtorx‘ The
smtry on guard
rqmrtcri his claim to
Darius, who asked in
surprise who the man
might be. “For surely, "
he said. “as lhave so
mntntly trtmtc to tha
thmne, there rtmrtnt he
(1rI_V Greek I0 whom I
am imlelmzd for t!
service. lltmlly any of
them have been here
yet. and I certainly
canrtot remember
owing anytltirtg to a
Greek. But bring him
in all the Xtlltlt’, that I
may know what ho
matrix by thtv rlaim. "
The guard escorted
Syluson into the royal
[)re.s'ence, and when the
interpreters asked him
who he was and what
he had dorm to justify
the statetrtertt that he
was the king is’ lJé'V1L’ft!Ctor, he reminder!
Darittr nfthe story of
the cloak, and said that
he was the man who
had given it him.
“Sir,
"
exclaimed
I)ariu.r, “you are the
nmst getmroax o
ftmw;
for while I was still (1
person ofrm power or
t.‘u’nS€¢]ttenL'e you gate
me u prt3\‘e‘!1I—.S‘I11ttll
indeed. but deserving
than tn‘ much gratitude
from me as would the
most splemlnl ufgtfts
today. 1 will give you in
return IVIOH’ xilwr and
gold than you can
mum, that you may
342 LAW 40
the most illustrious patron of the arts that history has ever known. Not only
did he spend lavishly on paintings, he created Italy’s finest apprentice
schools for young artists. It was in one of these schools that the young
Michelangelo first caught the attention of Lorenzo, who invited the artist to
come and live in his house. He did the same with Leonardo da Vinci. Once
under his wing, Michelangelo and Leonardo requited his generosity by be»
coming loyal artists in his stable.
Whenever Lorenzo faned an enemy, he would wield the weapon of
patronage. When Pisa, Florence’s traditional enemy, threatened to rebel
against it in 1472, Lorenzo placated its people by pouring money into its
university, which had once been its pride and joy but had long ago lost its
luster. The Pisans had no defense against this insidious maneuver, which simultaneously fed their love of culture and blunted their desire for battle.
Interpretation
Lorenzo undoubtedly loved the arts, but his patronage of artists had a
practical function as well, of which he was keenly aware. In Florence at the
time, banking was perhaps the least admired way of making money, and
was certainly not a
respected source of power. The arts were at the other
pole, the pole of qua.si—religious transcendence. By spending on the arts,
Lorenzo diluted people’s opinions of the ugly source of his wealth, disguising himself in nobility. There is no better use of strategic generosity than
that of distracting attention from an unsavory reality and wrapping oneself
in the mantle of art or religion.
Observance IV
Louis XIV had an eagle eye for the strategic power of money. When he
came to the throne, the powerful nobility had recently proven a
thump in
the monarchy’s side, and seethed with rebelliousness. So he impoverished
these aristocrats by making them spend enormous sums on maintaining
their position in the court. Making them dependent on royal largesse for
their livelihood, he had them in his claws.
Next Louis brought the nobles to their knees with strategic generosity.
It would work like this: Vtlhenever he noticed a stubborn courtier whose influence he needed to gain, or whose troublemaking he needed to squelch,
he would use his vast wealth to soften the soil. First he would ignore his victim, making the man anxious. Then the man would suddenly find that his
son had been given a well»paid post, or that funds had been spent liberally
in his home region, or that he had been given a painting he had long coveted. Presents would flow from Louis’s hands. Finally, weeks or months
later, Louis would ask for the favor he had needed all along. A man who
had once vowed to do anything to stop the king would find he had lost the
desire to fight. A straightforward bribe would have made him rebellious;
this was far more insidious. Facing hardened earth in which nothing could
take root, Louis loosened the soil before he planted his seeds.
Interpretation
Louis understood that there is a. deep-rooted emotional element in our attitude to money, an element going back to childhood. When we are chil-
dren, all kinds of complicated feelings about our parents center around
gifts; we see the giving of a as a Sign of love and approval. And that
emotional element never goes away. The recipients of gifts, financial or
otherwise, are suddenly as vulnerable as children, especially when the
comes from someone in authority. They cannot help opening up; their will
is loosened, as Louis loosened the soil.
To succeed best, the gift should come out of the blue. It should be re
markable for the fact that a like it has never been given before, or for
being preceded by a cold shoulder from the giver. The more often you give
to particular people, the blunter this weapon becomes. If they don’t take
your gifts for granted, becoming monsters of ingratitude, they will resent
what appears to be charity. The sudden, unexpected, onetime gift will not
spoil your children; it will keep them under your thumb.
Observance V
The antique dealer Fushimiya, who lived in the city of Edo (former name
for Tokyo) in the seventeenth century, once made a stop at a village tea~
house. After enjoying a
cup of tea, he spent several minutes scrutinizing the
cup, which he eventually paid for and took away with him. A local artisan,
watching this, waited until Fushimiya left the shop, then approached the old
woman who owned the teahouse and asked her who this man was. She told
him it was japan’s most famous connoisseur, antique dealer to the lord of
Izurno. The artisan ran out of the shop, caught up with Fushimiya, and
begged him to sell him the cup, which must clearly be valuable ifFushimiya
judged it so. Fushimiya laughed heartily: “It’s just an ordinary cup of Bizen
ware,” he explained, “and it is not valuable at all. The reason I was looking
at it was that the steam seemed to hang about it strangely and I wondered if
there wasn’t a leak somewhere.” (Devotees of the Tea Ceremony were interested in any odd or accidental beauty in nature.) Since the artisan still
seemed so excited about it, Fushimiya gave him the cup for free.
The artisan took the cup around, trying to find an expert who would
appraise it at a high price, but since all of them recognized it as an ordinary
teacup he got nowhere. Soon he was neglecting his own business, thinking
only of the cup and the fortune it could bring. Finally he went to Edo to
talk to Fushimiya at his shop. There the dealer, realizing that he had inad~
vertently caused this man pain by making him believe the cup had great
worth, paid him 100 ryo (gold pieces) for the cup as a kindness. The cup
was indeed mediocre, but he wanted to rid the artisan of his obsession,
while also allowing him to feel that his effort had not been wasted. The artisan thanked him and went on his way.
Soon word spread ofFushimiya’s purchase of the teacup. Every dealer
injapan clamored for him to sell it, since a
cup he had bought for 100 ryo
must be worth much more. He tried to explain the circumstances in which
he had bought the cup, but the dealers could not be dissuaded. Fushimiya
finally relented and put the cup up for sale.
During the auction, two buyers simultaneously bid 200 ryo for the
teacup, and then began to fight over who had bid first. Their fighting
never regret that you
omit,’ did 11 favor to
I)ariu.s' the son of
Hy,s\Irt.\'pes.
'’"My [or/I, "'
replied Sylosmz, “do
not give my gold or
Silver. hut recover
Sizmrzs for me. my
native i.s‘((Iml, whit‘/1
now .s'inct' Oraetes
killed my brother Poly
crates /iv in the hamiv
ofunc 0/our serwmlsx
Let Stmzos be your gff!
to me -1211! In! no man
in the island he kitlni
or enslaven‘. "
Darius wnsenled to
Syloxorz is request, and
dispatched a
formurl/lur the command
of()tune.>‘, one 0/r/te
seven, with orders to do
ex/eryrhtng that Sy/molt
had axkzui.
Tm: HISIORIES.
l'lr.ll(!!)n’l‘(.'S.
rrwm PFNTURY ac.
Money is newr spent an
.\'o Imtch mlwmlage us
when you have been
cheated out of it; for at
one stroke you have
pllrclm rerl prurlerlve.
Al{‘l'HL'lt
$(‘Il0PENllAl'F.R.
1788-1860
LAW 40 343
A (;Il<"|‘ OF I’ ISII
Kmzgsyi Hsiu, prmnter
ofLtt, was fond offish.
Therefore, people in
the whole murttry
consrivntiuttsly bougltt
fivh. which they
presented to trim.
However, Kurtg-_vt'
would not accept the
preterm‘. Agaimt such a
step his younger
brother remon5mztt’a'
with him and said:
"You !ilce_/isft, irldectl.
Why don ‘t you accept
the ]7rK.Y(’.ttf affixh? "
In
reply, he said: “I! is
solely bccttuse I like
fivlt that I wottltl not
accept t/ze/ixh they
gave me.
Imleetl, i/'1 accept the
fish, I will he platted
under an nizligarion m
tltern. ()m‘c pltzctett‘
under rm ohltgatirm It)
them, I will some time
have tr) bend the law. If
I bwzd 1451.’ law, I will be
dz'.s‘!nis'Sc‘tI from the
premierxixip. A/ter
being Liislmsl etl from
the pVdI?’ti('I2\hip, I
rniglxt not by nhlt’ to
supply myself with fish.
On tiw ctmtmry, tfl do
not t1(‘II(‘]?l /hr’ fish from
tlmn and am not
tti,vnis'.s(.'d the premiersltip, h()Wt’t’ct‘ flmd of
fish, I cut: always
supply rrtysclf
with fish.
"
HA.\-I~‘[;t- I717.
CHINLSI; yHn.0s<mi1«:P..
rt-mm run run n.<*.
344 LAW 40
tipped over a. table and the teacup fell to the ground and broke into several
pieces. The auction was clearly over. Fushimiya glued and mended the
cup, then stored it away, thinking the affair finished. Years later, however,
the great tea master Matsudalra Fumai visited the store, and asked to see
the cup, which by then had become legendazy. Fumai examined it. “As a
piece,” he said, “it is not up to much, but a Tea Master prizes sentiment and
association more than intrinsic value.” He bought the cup for a high sum.
A gluedtogelher work of less than ordinary craftsmanship had become
one of the most famous objects injapan.
Interpretation
The story shows, first, an essential aspect of money: That it is humans who
have created it and humans who instill it with meaning and value. Second,
with objects as with money, what the courtier most values are the semi»
ments and emotions embedded in them»-these are what make them worth
having. The lesson is simple: The more your gifts and your acts of generosity play with sentiment, the more powerful they are. The object or concept
that plays with a charged emotion or hits a chord of sentiment has more
power than the money you squander on an expensive yet lifeless present.
Observance VI
Akimoto Suzutomo, awealthy adherent of the tea ceremony, once gave his
page 100 ryo (gold pieces) and instructed him to purchase a tea bowl offered by a particular dealer. When the page saw the bowl, he doubted it
was worth that much, and after much bargaining got the price reduced to
95 ryo. Days later, afler Suzutomo had put the bowl to use, the page
proudly told him what he had done.
“What an ignoramus you are!” replied Suzutomo. “A tea. bowl that
anyone asks 100 pieces of gold for can only be a
family heirloom, and a
thing like that is only sold when the family is pressed for money. And in
that case they will be hoping to find someone who will give even 150
pieces for it. So what sort of fellow is it who does not consider their feelings? Quite apart from that, a curio that you give l0O ryo for is something
worth having, but one that has only cost 95 gives a mean impression. 50
never let me see that tea bowl again!” And he had the bowl locked away,
and never took it out.
Interpretation
When you insist on paying less, you may save your five ryo, but the insult
you cause and the cheap impression you create will cost you in reputation,
which is the thing the powerful prize above all. Learn to pay the full
price-—it vn'll save you a lot in the end.
Observance Vll
Sometime near the beginning of the seventeenth century injapan, a
group
of generals whiled away the lime before a big battle by staging an incense»
smelling competition. Each participant anted up a prize for the contesfs
winners-—bows, arrows, saddles, and other items a warrior would covet.
The great Lord Date Masamune happened to pass by and was induced to
parficipate. For a prize, he offered the gourd that hung from his belt. Every~
one laughed, for no one wanted to win this cheap item. A retainer of the
host finally accepted the gourd.
When the party broke up, however, and the generals were chatting
outside the tent, Masamune brought over his magnificent horse and gave it
to the retainer. “There,” he said, “a horse has come out of the gourd.” The
stunned generals suddenly regretted their scorn at Masamune’s gift.
Interpretation
Masamune understood the following: Money gives its possessor the ability
to give pleasure to others. The more you can do this, the more you attract
admiration. When you make a horse come out of a gourd, you give the ultimate demonstration of your power.
Image: The River. To protect
yourself or to save the resource,
you dam it up. Soon, however,
the waters become dank and
pestilent. Only the foulcst
forms of life can live in such
stagnant waters; nothing train
els on them, all commerce
stops. Destroy the dam. When
water flows and circulates, it gen
erates abundance, wealth, and
power in ever larger circles. The
River must flood periodically
for good things to flourish.
Authority: The great man who is a miser is a great fool, and a man in
high places can have no vice so harmful as avarice. A miserly man can
conquer neither lands nor lordships, for he does not have a plentiful
supply of friends with whom he may work his will. ‘Whoever wants to
have friends must not love his possessions but must acquire friends by
means of fair gifts; for in the same way that the lodestone subtly draws
iron to itself, so the gold and silver that a man gives attract the hearts
of men. (7712 Romance oft/Le Rose, Guillaume do Lorris, c. 1200-1238)
I took money only
from tlmse who could
rtflortl it and were will~
mg /0 go in with me in
.\'cIumm,«' they fancied
would fimcv others.
Tlmy wanled money
for its own xuke. 1
warzletl ilfor the luxuries t.1Itrl[)lEa2.9llr'o‘..s It
would a/"ford ma They
were seldom: crmcr,-rned
with human nature.
'I'izey knew }mle~mm‘
carer} lrm‘-—ai7oi1I their
fellow men. Ifthey had
been keener .311ltleIlI.~.’ of
human nature. ifthey
had given more time 10
wrnparziorzship with
their/'ell0w.s' and loss to
the chase oft/it’.
almigIzI_v dollar, I/my
would»: ‘I have hcvn
mch vary mm'k.s'.
“YH.i,ow Km" Wm.
18754970
LAW 40 345
LAVV 40
REVERSAL
The powerful never forget that what is offered for free is inevitably a trick.
Friends who offer favors without asking for payment will later want some
thing far dearer than the money you would have paid them. The bargain
has hidden problems, both material and psychological. Learn to pay, then,
and to pay well.
On the other hand, this Law offers great opportunities for swindling
and deception if you apply it from the other side. Dangling the lure of at
free lunch is the con artisfs stock in trade.
No man was better at this than the most successful con artist of our
age, Joseph Weil, a.k.a. “The Yellow Kid.” The Yellow Kid learned early
that what made his swindles possible was his fellow humans’ greed. “This
desire to get something for nothing,” he once wrote, “has been very costly
to many people who have dealt with me and with other can men. , . .
When people lea.rn——a3 I doubt they will—that they can’t get something
for nothing, crime will diminish and we shall all live in greater harmony.”
Over the years Weil devised many ways to seduce people with the prospect
of easy money. He would hand out “free” real estate——who could resist
such an offer?——and then the suckers would learn they had to pay $25 to
register the sale. Since the land was free, it seemed worth the high fee, and
the Yellow Kid would make thousands of dollars on the phony registration.
In exchange he would give his suckers a phony deed. Other times, he
would tell suckers about a fixed horse race, or a stock that would earn 200
percent in a few weeks. As he spun his stories he would watch the sucker’s
eyes open wide at the thought of a free lunch.
The lesson is simple: Bait your deceptions with the possibility of easy
money. People are essentially lazy, and want wealth to fall in their lap
rather than to work for it. For at small sum, sell them advice on how to
make millions (P. T. Barnum did this later in life), and that small sum will
become a fortune when multiplied by thousands of suckers. Lure people in
with the prospect of easy money and you have the room to work still more
deceptions on them, since greed is powerful enough to blind your victims
to anything. And as the Yellow Kid said, half the fun is teaching a moral
lesson: Greed does not pay.
LAW
41
AVOID STEPPING INTO
A GREAT MAN’S SHOES
jUD GMENT
What happmsfirst always appears better and more migina! than what comes afier. Ifyou succeed a great man
or have (1 jiugzous parent, you will have to accomplish
doubka their achievements to outshine them. Do not get
lost in their shadow, or stuck in a past not ofyam own
making: Establish your own name and identity by
changing comse. .S'lay the overfieafingfatheg diypamgv
his legacy, and gain power by shining in your own way.
.‘)'4»‘>’
Hli-, l‘,X('lIl.l,l-‘ll’!-I
OF Bl-'l.\(,. H! J’
Many would have
shone like (hr: very
phoenix in th('iI' 017(11-
palions :'foth<'r.\' had
not precerimi them.
Being first is a great
advurirsge: l1-‘Ill!
eminence, twice as
good. Deal the firsi
hand and you will win
the upper ground. . . .
Those who gr)“/irsl
win fame‘ by right of
bir!-P1, and {lime who
follow are like scicond
sans. contouring themselves with nmager
portions. . . .
Solomrm awed wisely
for parmsrn, yielding
warlike things to his
father. B)2 changing
course he foimci it
mxicr to become a
hero. . . .
And uurgreal Philip [I
gmzerncrl the entire
world from (hi? throne
of/iis prudence, astonishing the agent I
f
his
imconqurred fa!/ier
was a modal oferrergy.
Philip was tl paradigm
ofprmhznce. . . . This
sort ofnovelly has
lzelpsd the wellwtlvisrrd
win a place in the roll
ofzhc great.
Without leaving their
own art, the ingerzions
[came the common path
and take, even in
profrssions gray wiIl1
age, new steps inward
eminence. Horace
yielded epic poetry to
Virgil, imd Mama] the
lyric to Horace. Terence
opted for cwnedy.
Persirix jbr satire. elicit
hoping to be first in his
genre. Bold fancy never
mccumhzarl m facile
irrzimtimz.
A POCKET Muzuox
‘FOR Hi-:R0[-.5‘.
BALFAS/\R GRAN .
IRAN>3I.!\'l'l3D BY
Cmusr<>PHF,R MAURER,
1996
LAW 11
TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW
When Louis XIV died, in 1715, after a glorious fifty—five-year reign, all eyes
focused on his great-grandson and chosen successor, the future Louis XV.
Would the boy, only five at the time, prove as great a leader as the Sun
King? Louis XIV had transforrned a
country on the verge of civil war into
the preeminent power in Europe. The last years of his reign had been difli~
cult—-he had been old and l:ired——but it was hoped that the child would develop into the kind of strong ruler who would reinvigorate the land and
add to the firm foundation that Louis XIV had laid.
To this end the child was given the best minds of France as his tutors,
men who would instruct him in Lhe ads of statecraft, in the methods that
the Sun King had perfected. Nothing was neglected in his education. But
when Louis XV came to the throne, in 1726, a sudden change came over
him: He no longer had to study or please others or prove himself. He stood
alone at the top of a great country, with wealth and power at his command.
He could do as he wished.
In the first years of his reign, Louis gave himself over to pleasure, leaving the government in the hands of a ousted minister, André-Hercule de
Fleuiy. This caused little concern, for he was a. young man who needed to
sow his wild oats, and de Fleury was a good minister. But it slowly became
clear that {his was more than a passing phase. Louis had no interest in governing. His main worry was not France’s finances, or a possible war with
Spain, but boredom. He could not stand being bored, and when he was not
hunting deer, or chasing young girls, he whiled away his time at the gainbling tables, losing huge sums in a single night.
The court, as usual, reflected the tastes of the ruler. Gambling and lavish parties became the obsession. The courtiers had no concern with the future of France-—they poured their energies into charming the king, angling
for titles that would bring them life pensions, and for cabinet positions demanding little work but paying huge salaries. Parasites flocked to the court,
and the state’s debts swelled.
In 1745 Louis fell in love with Madame de Pompadour, a woman of
middle~cla,ss origin who had managed to rise through her charms, her intelligence, and a good marriage. Madame de Pompadour became the ofiicial
royal mistress; she also became France’s arbiter of taste and fashion. But
the Madame had political ambitions as well, and she eventually emerged
as the countxy’s unofficial piime minister——it was she, not Louis, who
wielded hiring~and-firing power over France’s most important ministers.
As he grew older Louis only needed more diversion. On the grounds
of Versailles he built a brothel, Pare aux Cerfs, which housed some of the
prettiest young girls of France. Underground passages and hidden staircases gave Louis access at all hours. After Madame de Pompadour died, in
1764, she was succeeded as royal mistress by Madame du Bariy, who soon
came to dominate the court, and who, like de Pompadour before her,
began to meddle in affairs of state. If a minister did not please her he would
find himself fired. All ofEurope was aghast when du Barry, the daughter of
a baker, managed to arrange the firing of Etienne de Choiseul, the foreign
minister and France’s most able diplomat. He had shown her too little respect. As time went by, swindlers and Charlatans made their nests in Versailles, and enticed Louis’s interest in astrology, the occult, and fraudulent
business deals. The young and pampered teenager who had taken over
France years before had only grown worse with age.
The motto that became attached to Louis’s reign was ‘.'Apré.r moi, It
de’lugz"——“After me the flood,” or, Let France rot after I am gone. And in
deed when Louis did go, in 1774, worn out by debauchery, his country and
his own finances were in horrible disarray. His grandson Louis XVI inherited a realm in desperate need of reform and a strong leader. But Louis
XVI was even weaker than his grandfather, and could only watch as the
country descended into revolution. In 1792 the republic introduced by the
French Revolution declared the end of the monarchy, and gave the king a
new name, “Louis the Last” A few months later he kneeled on the guillotine, his about—to—be—severed head stripped of all the radiance and power
that the Sun King had invested in the crown.
Interpretation
From a
country that had descended into civil war in the late 1640s, Louis
XIV forged the mightiest realm in Europe. Great generals would tremble
in his presence. A cook once made a mistake in prepaiing a dish and committed suicide rather than face the king’5 wrath. Louis XIV had many mis—
tresses, but their power ended in the bedroom. He filled his court with the
most brilliant minds of the age. The symbol of his power was Versailles:
Refusing to accept the palace of his forefathers, the Louvre, he built his
own palace in what was then the middle of nowhere, symbolizing that this
was a. new order he had founded, one without precedent He made Versailles the centerpiece of his reign, a place that all the powerful of Europe
envied and visited with a sense of awe. In essence, Louis took a great
void—the decaying monarchy of France—-and filled it with his own sym~
hols and radiant power.
Louis XV, on the other hand, symbolizes the fate of all those who in»
herit something large or who follow in a great man’s footsteps. It would
seem easy for a son or successor to build on the grand foundation lefi for
them, but in the realm of power the opposite is true. The pampered, indulged son almost always squanders the inheritance, for he does not start
with the father’s need to fill a void. As Machiavelli states, necessity is what
impels men to take action, and once the necessity is gone, only rot and
decay are left. Having no need to increase his store of power, Louis XV in—
evitably succumbed to inertia. Under him, Versailles, the symbol of the
Sun K.ing’s authority, became a pleasure palace of incomparable banality,
a kind of Las Vegas of the Bourbon monarchy. It came to represent all that
the oppressed peasantry of France hated about their king, and during the
Revolution they looted it with glee.
Louis XV had only one way out of the trap awaiting the son or successor of a man like the Sun King: to psychologically begin from nothing, to
l.ll-‘F. OF l‘F,R|(.l.F.:~,
As :4 young man Pen‘-
cles was inclined to
Shrink from faring the
people. One reason for
Ihlr was that he was
consirlered to hear n
distinct resernblance to
the tyrant Pisiszrmus,
and when men who
were well on in yearsremarked on the charm
of Pericles’ voice and
Ike .wnoolhne.rs and
fluency of his speech.
they were astonished at
the rescmblanre
between the two. The
fact that he was rich
and that he came oft:
dirzingxrisimd family
and possessed exceed»
ingly powerfulfriends
made the fear of
asrrucixm very real to
him, and at the beginning oflulr career he
took no part in palilics
bu! devoted himself to
soldiermg, in which he
showed great daring
and enzerprise.
However, the time Came
when Aristides was
dead, Themislocles in
exile, Amd Cimon
frequently absent on
distant campaigns.
Then at last }’erlcfes‘
decided to attach
himself :0 the peoples
party and to take up
the cause of the poor
and the many instead
ofrhat ofllze rich and
the few, in spite ofihe
fact that this was quite
contrary to his own
temperament, which
was thoroughly aristorratic. He was afraid,
appammly, of being
suspected ofaiming at
a rlictamrslxip; so rlmt
when he saw that
LAW 41 349
Cimun is .\"vm/mIhie’.\'
were strongly Wllll llw
nobles and Ilzat Cimnn
was thr idol oftlw arismrmtir: party, I’Wlcl(!.\'
lwgan to ingratmlo
l1lIY1.S‘€l/M'IIll the pcoplé‘.
partly for self-preservalion and partly by wuy
r»]'.\'e><'izrir1g power
against his rival.
He now mterml upon
or new mode lrflifr.
He was mm’:/r to be
.w,':>t1 walking in any
.\'m>et exrapi the mu’
which led to the
market-plarr and yhr’
council chtImbL'I‘.
Tm, LIFE or |'ERl<‘l.I-,3.
Pi lJ'lAR(‘Il,
(‘.A.D.4(1—l20
IIIIC I ll I2 HI" |‘l|"['Ri)
Pl{l{l‘il|'\(). |‘\|'\'I‘|’,|(
1 l—l7:[7—l'»2ll
How lJ::ne]ii:ial poverty
may wmezinzes be to
those with tulcm, and
how ii may serve as a
powerful guru! to muku
them perferl or excellml in whale ver uu‘u'
pamm //my mighl
(flit):/S6, can be .\‘€(,’Il
wry Clrurly in the
actions of Pierrn
Pemgino. Wishing by
means u,/his ability to
attain some I‘(3S])(!t'lfll)ll’
rank. (1/[(.’!’ leaving
1liS‘(1SIl'(1NS cu/alnilies
behind in Perugia «ml
Cuming lu Flurmce, he
remained Ahere many
mnmhs in poverty,
sleeping in u ('h(€.\‘l»
simte he had no other
bed; he tumerl nigh!
into (luv. and with the
greawrl zeal cominuv
ally applied himself to
350 LAW 41
denigrate the past and his inheritance, and to move in a
totally new direct»
tion, creating his own world. Assuming you have the choice, it would be
better to avoid the situation altogether, to place yourself where there is a
vacuum of power, where you can be the one to bring order out of chaos
without having to compete with another star in the sky. Power depends on
appearing larger than other people, and when you are lost in the shadow of
the father, the king, the great predecessor, you cannot possibly project such
a
presence.
But when thzy began to make sovereignty hewditary, the children quickly
degeneratedfrom theirfathers; and, so farfrom trying to equal theirfathefs
virtues, they considered that a prince had nothing else to do than to excel
all the rest in idleness, indulgence, and every other variety ofplmmre.
Nicwlfr llv1(l(’/ll(l‘U!.‘ll2, 1469 I 527
OBSERVANCF. OF THE LAW
Alexander the Great had a dominant passion as a
young man—~an intense
dislike for his father, King Philip of Macedonia. He hated Philip’s cunning,
cautious style of ruling, his bombastic speeches, his drinking and whoring,
and his love of wrestling and of other wastes of time. Alexander knew he
had to make himselfthe very opposite of his domineering father: He would
force himself to be bold and reckless, he would control his tongue and be a
man of few words, and he would not lose precious time in pursuit of pleasures that brought no glory. Alexander also resented the fact that Philip
had conquered most of Greece: “My father will go on conquering till there
is nothing extraonhnary left for me to do,” he once complained. Vllhile
other sons ofpowerful men were content to inherit wealth and live a life of
leisure, Alexander wanted only to outdo his father, to obliterate Philip’s
name from history by surpassing his accomplishments.
Alexander itched to show others how superior he was to his father. A
Thessalian h0rse»dealer once brought a prize horse named Bucephalus to
sell to Philip. None of the king’s grooms could get near the horse—it was
far too savage——a.nd Philip berated the merchant for bringing him such a
useless beast. Watching the whole affair, Alexander scowled and commented, “What a horse they are losing for want of skill and spirit to man‘
age him!” When he had said this several times, Philip had finally had
enough, and challenged him to take on the horse. He called the merchant
back, secretly hoping his son would have a nasty fa.ll and learn a bitter lesson. But Alexander was the one to teach the lesson: Not only did he mount
Bucephalus, he managed to ride him at full gallop, taming the horse that
would later carry him all the way to India. The courtiers applauded wildly,
but Philip seethed inside, seeing not a son but a rival to his power.
Alexander’s defiance of his father grew bolder. One day the two men
had a heated argument before the entire court, and Philip drew his sword
as if to strike his son; having drunk too much wine, however, the king
stumbled. Alexander pointed at his father and jeered, “Men of Macedonia,
see there the man who is preparing to pass from Europe to Asia. He cannot
pass from one table to another without falling.”
When Alexander was eighteen, a disgruntled courtier murdered
Philip. As word of the regicide spread through Greece, city after city rose
up in rebellion against their Macedonian rulers. Philip’s advisers counseled
Alexander, now the king, to proceed cautiously, to do as Philip had done
and conquer through cunning. But Alexander would do things his way: He
marched to the furthest reaches of the kingdom, suppressed the rebellious
towns, and reunited the empire with brutal efficiency.
As a
young rebel grows older, his struggle against the father often
wanes, and he gradually comes to resemble the very man he had wanted to
defy. But Alexandefs loathing of his father did not end with Phi.lip’s death.
Once he had consolidated Greece, he set his eyes on Persia, the prize that
had eluded his father, who had dreamed of conquering Asia. If he defeated
the Persians, Alexander would finally surpass Philip in glory and fame.
Alexander crossed into Asia with an army of 35,000 to face 3. Persian
force numbering over a million. Before engaging the Persians in battle he
passed through the town of Gordium. Here, in the town’s main temple,
there stood an ancient chariot tied with cords made of the rind of the cornel tree. Legend had it that any man who could undo these cords——the
Gordian knot—~would rule the world. Many had tried to untie the enor
mous and intricate knot, but none had succeeded. Alexander, seeing he
could not possibly untie the knot with his bare hands, took out his sword
and with one slash cut it in half. This symbolic gesture showed the world
that he would not do as others, but would blaze his own path.
Against astounding odds, Alexander conquered the Persians. Most expected him to stop there--it was a great triumph, enough to secure his
fame for eternity. But Alexander had the same relationship to his own
deeds as he had to his father: His conquest of Persia represented the past,
and he wanted never to rest on past triumphs, or to allow the past to outshine the present. He moved on to India, extending his empire beyond all
known limits. Only his disgruntled and weary soldiers prevented him from
going farther.
Interpretation
Alexander represents an extremely uncommon type in history: the son of
a famous and successful man who manages to surpass the father in glory
and power. The reason this type is uncommon is simple: The father most
often manages to amass his fortune, his kingdom, because he begins with
little or nothing. A desperate urge irnpels him to succeed»-he has nothing
to lose by cunning and impetuousness, and has no famous father of his
own to compete against. This kind of man has reason to believe in
himself-—-to believe that his way of doing things is the best, because, after
all, it worked for him.
When a man like this has a son, he becomes domineering and oppres
sive, imposing his lessons on the son, who is starting off life in circums
stances totally different from those in which the father himself began.
the szzttly (>Hzz.s','zrnfe.s'~
slim. /l_fn’r painzlrxg hart’
})t?{'()I)'l€ SL’l't')IId mfiure
to him. Pietro ls’ mil)’
plcmitre was alway.s' to
be working in his craft
and c(m,_s'IunIl_v to bl"
painting. Ana’ he’r:4m.nv
he always‘ had the
drmzl nfpuvt’r1y before
his eym, he did things
to make money wlziclr
he probably would not
have bolhered 10 do
had he not been fora/4/
to support himself.
Perhaps wealth would
have closed to him and
his Iulem the path to
arcellencc }'u.\'t as
poverty luzcl opener! it
up to him. but need
.5p£lt’((:’l.l I/rirn on since he
rlesireu’ 10 rise from
such :1 rrziscmblc and
lowly posit.imt— if/1m‘
pcrlzaps to the summit
and .s'uprr'nu* iwiglsx of
ex(cllcnu', than at least
to L! point where he
could have (,‘f1()u,I,'l2 to
live on. For this train»,
he look no rmlirre of
Cold. hunger, dist ‘(N11-
fnrt, im'mzvmir'r:rz>, rail
or rhamv iflw could
only live our zlny in
rzaxr-. and repose; and he
would (1lways.s'(1y—-um]
as ifit were a pmwrb—
that after bad weather.
good weather must
follow, and that (luring
the good weculrer
houses muxl be built for
shelter in times ofnccd.
Ll‘/!—,S or THE 4R't‘!S‘l.\'.
Glt)R(}lO Vas. RE.
l5! l—l574
LAW 41 351
I'll}. l’R()l£|,l-I\I {W
|’.\| l, \1URl'l|V
The xlightesz (I(.'I]£laiIttwice with c .S‘I1(>w'.\‘
one that it is a play
rubstttutc for tho art uf
war and indeed it has
been a fmmrite rectoation ofxome ofthe
grerztest ntilitnry [mt]-
ers, from Wt'Iliam the
Cfnnqmrror to
Napoleon.
In the crmte.\‘1 hem-teen
the opposing txrmius‘
the samv prinripltzv of
bat}: strategy and Mexico‘
are </is/7la_‘\=s'r1 as in.
actual war, the sutitc
foresiglzt and powers of
miculutimz are necc»:s~
sary. the same capacity
/or rlivi/iirtg the _1)lart.s'
of the apprme-nt, and
the rigor with which
rferixiriris arr followetl
by their Ct)/1.$'t.’ql4L’l1C(.’S
is, if'(trt_vthin;:. Wm
more ruthless: More
(him that, is it plain that
the unconsciotts motive
actuating the p[(lyk'r.)‘ is
not the mere love of
pugtzaciry t‘Iramcteris‘tic
of all C0f7lpx'.‘f$l1W’
games, but Ihr grirrtmer
tme ofl'uthcr—murder.
It is mic that the original goal ofcapturing
the king Imr been given
up, butfrmn the (min!
of vmw of motive thaw,’
is, except in respect of
cmdity, not 0[J])f(’Ci((ll’l’
change in the pV€St’t11
goal of stertlizing him
in immobility, .. .
“Checkmate "
I7(€[i'I!.\'
Iircm/ty "tho king is
(lead. ”
. . . Om krzrwlvdge of
the uru'rm.<cim1.s' motivation oft:/1r>.v.v-7:1/tytrtgg
tells‘ us that what it
rupt'e,\'m1Iv(l could only
have been the wish to
uw'rx:mm the falher in
an zlcceptctblt’ wuy. . . .
[I is no drmht signifi352 LAW 41
Instead of allowing the son to go in a new direction, the father will try to
put him in his own shoes, perhaps secretly wishing the boy will fail, as
Philip halfwanted to see Alexander thrown from Bucephalus. Fathers envy
their sons’ youth and vigor, after all, and their desire is to control and dominate. The sons of such men tend to become cowed and cautious, terrified
of losing what their fathers have gained.
The son will never step out of his father’s shadow unless he adopts the
ruthless strategy of Alexander: disparage the past, create your own kingdom, put the father in the shadows instead of letting him do the same to
you. If you cannot materially start from ground zero—--it would be foolish
to renounce an inheritance-—you can at least begin from ground zero psychologically, by throwing off the weight of the past and charting a new di—
rection. Alexander instinctively recognized that privileges of birth are
impediments to power. Be merciless with the past, then——not only with
your father and his father but with your own earlier achievements. Only
the weak rest on their laurels and dote on past triumphs; in the game of
power there is never time to rest
KEYS TO POWER
In many ancient kingdoms, for example Bengal and Sumatra, after the
king had ruled for several years his subjects would execute him. This was
done partly as a ritual ofrenewal, but also to prevent him from growing too
powerful—for the king would generally try to establish a permanent order,
at the expense of other families and of his own sons. Instead of protecting
the tribe and leading it in times of war, he would attempt to dominate it.
And so he would be beaten to death, or executed in an elaborate ritual.
Now that he was no longer around for his h0l101‘S to go to his head, he
could be worshipped as a god. Meanwhile the field had been cleared for a
new and youthful order to establish itself.
The ambivalent, hostile attitude towards the king or father figure also
finds expression in legends of heroes who do not know their father. Moses,
the archetypal man of power, was found abandoned among the bulrushes
and never knew his parents; without a. father to compete with him or limit
him, he could attain the heights ofpower. Hercules had no earthly father——
he was the son of the god Zeus. Later in his life Alexander the Great spread
the story that the god Jupiter Ammon had sired him, not Philip of Macedon. Legends and rituals like these eliminate the human father because he
symbolizes the destructive power of the past.
The past prevents the young hero from creating his own world--he
must do as his father did, even after that father is dead or powerless. The
hero must how and scrape before his predecessor and yield to tradition
and precedent. What had success in the past must be carried over to the
present, even though circumstances have greatly changed. The past also
weighs the hero down with an inheritance that he is terrified of losing,
making him timid and cautious.
Power depends on the ability to fill a void, to occupy a field that has
been cleared of the dead weight of the past. Only after the father figure has
been properly done away with will you have the necessary space to create
and establish a new order. There are several strategies you can adopt to accomplish this—-——varia!ions on the execution of the king that disguise the vio~
lence of the impulse by channeling it in socially acceptable forms.
Perhaps the simplest way to escape the shadow of the past is simply to
belittle it, playing on the timeless antagonism between the generations, stir—
ring up the young against the old. For this you need a convenient older figute to pillory. Mao Tse—tung, confronting a culture that fiercely resisted
change, played on the suppressed resentment against the overbearing presence of the venerable Confucius in Chinese culture. john F. Kennedy
knew the dangers of getting lost in the past; he radically distinguished his
presidency from that of his predecessor, Dwight D. Eisenhower, and also
from the preceding decade, the 19505, which Eisenhower personified.
Kennedy, for instance, would not play the dull and fatherly game of golf——
a symbol of retirement and privilege, and Eisenhowefs passion. Instead he
played football on the White House lawn. In every aspect his administration represented vigor and youth, as opposed to the stodgy Eisenhower.
Kennedy had discovered an old truth: The young are easily set against the
old, since they yearn to make their own place in the world and resent the
shadow of their fathers.
The distance you establish from your predecessor often demands
some symbolism, a way of advertising itselfpublicly. Louis XIV, for example, created such symbolism when he rejected the traditional palace of the
French kings and built his own palace of Versailles. King Philip II ofSpain
did the same when he created his center of power, the palace of El Escorial, in what was then the middle of nowhere. But Louis carried the game
further: He would not be a king like his father or earlier ancestors, he
would not wear a crown or carry a
scepter or sit on a throne, he would establish a new kind of imposing authority with symbols and rituals of its
own. Louis made his ancestors’ rituals into laughable relics of the past. Follow his example: Never let yourself be seen as following your predecessor’s path. If you do you will never surpass him. You must physically
demonstrate your difference, by establishing a style and symbolism that
sets you apart.
The Roman emperor Augustus, successor to Julius Caesar, understood
this thoroughly. Caesar had been a great general, a theatrical figure whose
spectacles kept the Romans entertained, an international emissary seduced
by the charms of Cleopat:ra~a largerlhanalife figure. So Augustus, despite
his own theatrical tendencies, competed with Caesar not by trying to outdo
him but by differentiating himself from him: He based his power on a return to Roman simplicity, an austerity of both style and substance. Against
the memory of Caesars sweeping presence Augustus posed a quiet and
manly dignity.
The problem with the overbearing predecessor is that he fills the vistas
before you with symbols of the past. You have no room to create your own
name. To deal with this situation you need to hunt out the vacuums»-wthose
cant 351:2! {nineteenthcerimry dress rlzarru
pron Paul] i’l'Iurphy’r
soaring odyssey into
the higher realms of
chess begun just (1)7807
after the unexpectedly
sudden dearh 0f
his
falhcr, whirl: had been
a
great rlzock Io him,
and we may .sumu's'e
that his brilliant effort
nfsublimation wa r. like
Shakespeare it Hamlet
and Freudfr The Interpretation of Dreams. a
rmrglion to this critical
event...
Something should now
be said about the recepzmn Mnrphylr
szrccesmr met with, for
they were ofsucl: I:
kind as to rizise lire
qniesliorr whether his
subsequent collapse
may no! ltrrve lzemz
influenced through his
perhaps beionging to
the type that Freud has
described under the
IUIIHI? of Die am
Erfolgc schoiiem
(
“
Those wrecked by
.ruczte.rs"). . . .Coached
in more psychological
language. was Morphy
affrighted at his own
prcsmnpruousnms
when the light of
publicity was thrown
on [l!l.S' great rurce.rs?/
Freud has pointed out
(ha! thepeople who
break under the strain
of too great .mcre.vs do
so because they can
endure it only in imagimzzion. no! in reality. To
castrate the father in :2
dream is :1 very differ»
em‘ mrrtierfrorn doing
it in reality. The real
situation provokes: the
(AnC0n.'~‘lTi0!LS guilt in its
full force. and the
/zemzlzy may bn menial
collapse.
Tllf, PRURl_F'Vl OF PAH!
MURPHY,
ER.NES'l‘ Jorcrs.
I951
LAW 41 35.?
354 LAW 41
areas in culture that have been left vacant and in which you can become
the first and principal figure to shine.
When Pericles of Athens was about to launch a career as a statesman,
he looked for the one thing that was missing in Athenian politics. Most of
the great politicians of his time had allied themselves with the aristocracy;
indeed Pericles himselfhad aristocratic tendencies. Yet he decided to throw
in his hat with the city’s democratic elements. The choice had nothing to
do with his personal beliefs, but it launched him on a brilliant career. Out
of necessity he became a man of the people. Instead of compefing in an
arena filled with great leaders both past and present, he would make a
name for himself where no shadows could obscure his presence.
When the painter Diego de Velazquez began his career, he knew he
could not compete in refinement and technique with the great Renaissance
painters who had come before him. Instead he chose to work in a style that
by the standards of the time seemed coarse and rough, in a way that had
never been seen before. And in this style he excelled. There were members of the Spanish court who wanted to demonstrate their own break with
the past; the newness of Velé.zquez’s style thrilled them. Most people are
afraid to break so boldly with tradition, but they secretly admire those who
can break up the old forms and reinvigorate the culture. This is why there
is so much power to be gained from entering vacuums and voids.
There is a kind of stubborn stupidity that recurs throughout history,
and is a strong impediment to power: The superstitious belief that if the
person before you succeeded by doing A, B, and C, you can re-create their
success by doing the same thing. This cookie-cutter approach will seduce
the uncreative, for it is easy, and appeals to their timidity and their laziness.
But circumstances never repeat themselves exactly.
When General Douglas MacArthur assumed command of American
forces in the Philippines during World War II, an assistant handed him a
book containing the various precedents established by the commanders
before him, the methods that had been successful for them. MacArthur
asked the assistant how many copies there were of this book. Six, the assistant answered. “Well,” the general replied, “you get all those six copies together and burn them—-every one of them. I’ll not be ‘bound by
precedents. Any time a problem comes up, I’ll make the decision at
once—immediately.” Adopt this ruthless strategy toward the past: Bum all
the books, and train yourself to react to circumstances as they happen.
You may believe that you have separated yourself from the predeces
sor or father figure, but as you grow older you must be eternally vigilant
lest you become the father you had rebelled against. As a
young man, Mao
Tse-tung disliked his father and in the struggle against him found his own
identity and a new set of values. But as he aged, his father’s ways crept back
in. Mao’s father had valued manual work over intellect; Mao had scoffed at
this as a
young man, but as he grew older he unconsciously returned to his
father’s views and echoed such outdated ideas by forcing a whole genera.»
tion of Chinese intellectuals into manual labor, a nightmarish mistake that
cost his regime dearly. Remember: You are your own father. Do not let
yourself spend years creating yourself only to let your guard down and
allow the ghost of the past—father, habit, history—to sneak back in.
Finally, as noted in the story of Louis XV, plenitude and prosperity
tend to make us lazy and inactive: When our power is secure we have no
need to act. This is a serious danger, especially for those who achieve success and power at an early age. The playwright Tennessee Williams, for instance, found himself skyrocketed from obscurity to fame by the success of
The Glass Menagerie. “The sort of life which I had had previous to this popuv
lar success,” he later wrote, “was one that required endurance, a life of
clawing and scratching, but it was a good life because it was the sort of life
for which the human organism is created. I was not aware of how much
vital energy had gone into this struggle until the struggle was removed.
This was security at last. I sat down and looked about me and was suddenly
very depressed.” Williams had a nervous breakdown, which may in fact
have been necessary for him: Pushed to the psychological edge, he could
start writing with the old vitality again, and he produced A Streetcar Named
Desire. Fyodor Dostoyevsky, similarly, whenever he wrote a successful
novel, would feel that the financial security he had gained made the act of
creation unnecessary. He would take his entire savings to the casino and
would not leave until he had gambled away his last penny. Once reduced
to poverty he could write again.
It is not necessary to go to such extremes, but you must be prepared to
return to square one psychologically rather than growing fat and lazy with
prosperity. Pablo Picasso could deal with success, but only by constantly
changing the style of his painting, often breaking completely with what
had made him successful before. How often our early triumphs turn us
into a kind of caricature of ourselves. Powerful people recognize these
traps; like Alexander the Great, they struggle constantly to re—create themselves. The father must. not be allowed to return; he must be slain at every
step of the way.
Image: The Father. He casts a
giant shadow over his children,
keeping them in thrall long
after he is gone by tying them
to the past, squashing their
youthful spirit, and forcing
them down the same tired path
he followed himself. His tricks
are many. At every crossroads you must slay the father
and step out of his shadow.
LAW 41 355
3.56 LAW 4!
Authority: Beware of stepping into a
great maifs shoes—-you will have to
accomplish twice as much to surpass
him. Those who follow are taken for
imitators. No matter how much they
sweat, they will never shed that bur—
den. It is an uncommon skill to find a
new path for excellence, a modern
route to celebrity. There are many
roads to singularity, not all of them
well traveled. The newest ones can be
arduous, but they are often shortcuts to
greatness. (Baltasar Gracian, 1601-1658)
REVE RSAL
The shadow of a great predecessor could be used to advantage if it is chosen as a trick, a tactic that can be discarded once it has brought you power
Napoleon III used the name and legend of his illustrious grand-uncle
Napoleon Bonaparte to help him become first president and then emperor
of France. Once on the throne, however, he did not stay tied to the past’, he
quickly showed how different his reign would be, and was careful to keep
the public from expecting him to attain the heights that Bonaparte had attained.
The past often has elements worth appropriating, qualities that would
be foolish to reject out of a need to distinguish yourself. Even Alexander
the Great recognized and was influenced by his father’s skill in organizing
an army. Making a display of doing things differently from your predecessor can make you seem childish and in fact out of control, unless your actions have a
logic of their own.
Joseph II, son of the Austrian empress Maria Theresa, made a show of
doing the exact opposite of his mother—dressing like an ordinary citizen,
staying in inns instead of palaces, appearing as the “people’s emperor”
Maria Theresa, on the other hand, had been regal and aristocratic. The
problem was that she had also been beloved, an empress who ruled wisely
after years of learning the hard way. If you have the kind of intelligence
and instinct that will point you in the right direction, playing the rebel will
not be dangerous. But ifyou are mediocre, as_]0sepl’1 II was in comparison
to his mother, you are better oi? learning from your predecessor’s knowledge and experience, which are based on something real.
Finally, it is often wise to keep an eye on the young, your future rivals
in power. just as you try to rid yourself of your father, they will soon play
the same trick on you, clenigrating everything you have accornplished._]ust
as you rise by rebelling against the past, keep an eye on those rising from
below, and never give them the chance to do the same to you.
The great Baroque artist and architect Pietro Bemini was a master at
sniffing out younger potential rivals and keeping them in his shadow. One
day a
young stonemason named Francesco Boiromini showed Bernini his
architectural sketches. Recognizing his talent immediately, Bernini instantly hired Borromini as his assistant, which delighted the young man but
was actually only a tactic to keep him close at hand, so that he could play
psychological games on him and create in him a kind of inferiority com~
plex. And indeed, despite Borromini’s brilliance, Bernini has the greater
fame. His strategy with Boirornini he made a
lifelong practice: Fearing that
the great sculptor Alessandro Algardi, for example, would eclipse him in
fame, he arranged it so that Algardi could only find work as his assistant.
And any assistant who rebelled against Bernini and tried to strike out on
his own would find his career ruined.
LAW «ll V 357
LAW
42
STRIKE THE SHEPHERD
AND THE SHEEP
WILL SCATTER
J U D G MENT
Tmuble can often be traced to a single stnmg individu.al———z}te stirm; the mmgcmt undenfing the jaoistmer of
gvmfwill. 17you allow such people room to ogberaie, others
will succumb to their influence. D0 not wzzitfarr the mm»
bles they cause to multiply, do not try to negotiate with
them--they are tmdeemable. Nmtralize their influence
by isolating or banishing them. Strike at the source ofthe
trouble and tlua shes]: will scatter
358
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW I
Near the end of the sixth century B.C., the city-state of Athens overthrew
the series of petty tyrants who had dominated its politics for decades. It established instead a democracy that was to last over a century, a dernoc»
racy that became the source of its power and its proudest achievement.
But as the democracy evolved, so did a problem the Athenians had never
faced: How to deal with those who did not concern themselves with the
cohesion of a small city surrounded by enemies, who did not work for its
greater glory, but thought of only themselves and their own ambitions and
petty intrigues? The Athenians understood that these people, if left alone,
would sow dissension, divide the city into factions, and stir up anxieties,
all of which could lead to the ruin of their democracy.
Violent punishment no longer suited the new, civilized order that
Athens had created. Instead the citizens found another, more satisfying,
and less brutal way to deal with the chronically selfish: Every year they
would gather in the marketplace and write on a piece of earthenware, an
astralcon, the name of an individual they wanted to see banished from the
city for ten years. If a particular name appeared on six thousand ballots,
that person would instantly be exiled. If no one received six thousand
votes, the person with the most artmka recording his name would suffer
the ten-year “ostracism.” This ritual expulsion became a kind of festival—-
what a
joy to be able to banish those irritating, anxie ~inducing individuals who wanted to rise above the group they should have served.
In 490 8.0, Aristides, one of the great generals of Athenian history,
helped defeat the Persians at the battle of Marathon. Meanwhile, off the
battlefield, his fairness as a
judge had earned him the nickname “The
just.” But as the years went by the Athenians came to dislike him. He
made such a Show of his righteousness, and this, they believed, disguised
his feelings of superiority and scorn for the common folk. His omnipresence in Athenian politics became obnoxious; the citizens grew tired of
hearing him called “The just.” They feared that this was just the type of
man——judgmental, haughty—who would eventually stir up fierce divisions among them, In 482 B.C., despite Aristides’ invaluable expertise in
‘
the continuing war with the Persians, they collected the ostraka and had
him banished.
After Aristides’ ostracism, the great general Themistocles emerged as
the city’s premier leader. But his many honors and victories went to his
head, and he too became arrogant and overbearing, constantly reminding
the Athenians of his triumphs in battle, the temples he had built, the dangers he had fended oil. He seemed to be saying that without him the city
would come to ruin. And so, in 472 B.C., Thernistocles’ name was filled in
on the ostra/ca and the city was rid of his poisonous presence.
The greatest political figure in fifth-century Athens was undoubtedly
Pericles. Although several times threatened with ostranism, he avoided
that fate by maintaining close ties with the people. Perhaps he had learned
a lesson as a child from his favorite tutor, the incomparable Damon, who
THIV, f.()\Ql'IC\T Hi‘ l‘l".Iil
Tlw struggle new
bccunm fiercur than
over anmml the royai
liner /ofA1ahuulpa,
king nj’/he Inca»
empire]. I1 reeled more
and mom, am! at
length, sewrexl of the
nobles who supported
it having been slain. it
mix‘ ovrcrmmcd. and
the Indian prince
would have (1)7213 with
violence to the groumi.
had nor his fall been
broken by the efforts of
Pizarro and some other
oflhe cu vultrtm“, who
mughrlzim in their
arm; The imperial
horia was insmnfly
srmrchezl from his
temples by a soldier,
and the unhappy
mnrzarcli. strongly
secured, was removed
to a neighboring bm’ld~
ing where he was carefully guarded.
All attcmpr at r:’5is—
twice now ceased, The
fare oftlic Inca
[/lrainmilmi sorm
.\'[)N,‘l!Il over town and
mumry. The Lharm
that might have held
thr Peruvinnr together
way d:’.r.r(1h-«art. Every
man Ilirmghz only of
his own xufety. Even
the [mean] soldier)’
encamped an the ad/'av
Cemfields took the
nlrrrm, wad, learning the
fatal Iitlingr, were seen
/lying in rwrv rlirec1i()n
before their _pur.m(er.v,
who in me hm! of
triumph showed no
much Gfi-"1l'l’4"}’. At
length night, more pi/iv
/‘ul than man, threw her
frizwdly mtmrle over
the fugitives, and (hr
LAW 42 359
cumered troops of
Pizarro rallied once‘
more at the mum! of
the trumpe! in
the blrizitly square of
Cajrmxorca. . . .
/Alalzuzzlpa,’ was reverv
enrerl us more than a
human. He was not
merely the head of the
mite, but the [mint to
which ail its Ert5fiIl1£§0!LV
can verged as to a
common cr.'n1z*r—zIz(e
/((€}'.S‘l(Jfl€ of!/ze political fabric whiclz must
flail! [0 pieces‘ by its own
weight when rho! was
withdrawn. So it fared
on the [execution] of
Amhuulpa. flis death
not only left the throne
vacam. without any
certain soon-xsor, bu:
the mzmner ofir
announcer! Io the
Peruvian meople that
It hand stronger than
that of their Incas hurl
now seized the .w:ep:‘£'n",
and that the dynasty
o/"the Children o/‘the
Sun had passed
away forever.
me COh'(‘)Uk;S'I' or PERU.
WILLIAM ll. PR1-_’S(‘0‘I'T,
l 847
360 LAW 42
excelled above all other Athenians in his intelligence, his musical skills,
and his rhetorical abilities, It was Damon who had trained Pericles in the
arts of ruling. But he, too, suffered ostracism, for his superior airs and his
insulting manner toward the commoners stirred up too much resentment.
Toward the end of the century there lived a man named Hyperbolus.
Most writers of the time describe him as the city’s most worthless citizen:
He did not care what anyone thought of him, and slandered whomever he
disliked. He amused some, but irritated many more. In 417 B.C., Hyperbolus saw an opportunity to stir up auger against the two leading politicians
of the time, Alcibiades and Nicias. He hoped that one of the two would be
ostracized and that he would rise in that man’s place. His campaign
seemed likely to succeed: The Athenians disliked Alcibiades’ flamboyant
and carefree lifestyle, and were wary of Nicias’ wealth and aloofness.
They seemed certain to ostracize one or the other. But Alcibiades and
Nicias, although they were otherwise enemies, pooled their resources and
managed to turn the ostracism on Hyperbolus instead. His obnoxiousness, they argued, could only be terminated by banishment.
Earlier sufferers of ostracism had been formidable, powerful men.
Hyperbolus, however, was a low buffoon, and with his banishment the
Athenians felt that ostracism had been degraded. And so they ended the
practice that for nearly a hundred years had been one of the keys to keeping the peace within Athens.
Interpretation
The ancient Athenians had social instincts unknown toclay—the passage
of centuries has blunted them. Citizens in the true sense of the word, the
Athenians sensed the dangers posed by asocial behavior, and saw how
such behavior often disguises itself in other forms: the holier-tharythou attitude that silently seeks to impose its standards on others; overweening
ambition at the expense of the common good; the flaunting of superiority;
quiet scheming; terminal obnoxiousness. Some of these behaviors would
eat away at the city’s cohesion by creating factions and sowing dissension,
others would ruin the democratic spirit by making the common citizen
feel inferior and envious. The Athenians did not try to reeducate people
who acted in these ways, or to absorb them somehow into the group, or to
impose a violent punishment that would only create other problems. The
solution was quick and effective: Get rid of them.
Within any group, trouble can most often be traced to a single source,
the unhappy, chronically dissatisfied one who will always stir up dissension and infect the group with his or her ill ease. Before you know what hit
you the dissatisfaction spreads. Act before it becomes impossible to disentangle one strand of misery from another, or to see how the whole thing
started. First, recognize troublemakers by their overbearing presence, or
by their complaining nature. Once you spot them do not try to reform
them or appease them-—that will only make things worse. Do not attack
them, whether directly or indirectly, for they are poisonous in nature and
will work underground to destroy you. Do as the Athenians did: Banish
them before it is too late. Separate them from the group before they become the eye of a whirlpool. Do not give them time to stir up anxieties
and sew discontent; do not give them room to move. Let one person suffer so that the rest can live in peace.
When the tree‘/"alts, the monkeys scatter.
Chinese saying
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW II
In 1296 the cardinals of the Catholic Church met in Rome to select a new
pope. They chose Cardinal Gaetani, for he was incomparably shrewd;
such a man would make the Vatican a
great power. Taking the name Boni~
face VIII, Gaetani soon proved he deserved the cardinals’ high opinion of
him: He plotted his moves carefully in advance, and stopped at nothing to
get his way. Once in power, Boniface quickly crushed his rivals and unified the Papal States. The European powers began to fear him, and sent
delegates to negotiate with him. The German King Albrecht of Austria
even yielded some territory to Boniface. All was proceeding according to
the pope’s plan.
One piece did not fall into place, however, and that was Tuscany, the
richest part of Italy. If Boniface could conquer Florence, Tuscany’s most
powerful city, the region would be his. But Florence was a proud republic,
and would be hard to defeat. The pope had to play his cards skillfully.
Florence was divided by two rival factions, the Blacks and the Whites.
The Whites were the merchant families that had recently and quickly
risen to power and wealth; the Blacks were the older money. Because of
their popularity with the people, the Whites retained control of the city, to
the Blacks’ increasing resentment. The feud between the two grew steadily
more bitter.
Here Boniface saw his chance: He would plot to help the Blacks take
over the city, and Florence would be in his pocket. And as he studied the
situation he began to focus on one man, Dante Alighieri, the celebrated
writer, poet, and ardent supporter of the Whites. Dante had always been
interested in politics. He believed passionately in the republic, and often
chastised his fellow citizens for their lack of spine. He also happened to be
the city’s most eloquent public speaker. In 1300, the year Boniface began
plotting to take over Tuscany, Dante’s fellow citizens had voted him in to
Florence’s highest elected position, making him one of the city’s six priors. During his six-month term in the post, he had stood firmly against the
Blacks and against all of the pope’s attempts to sow disorder.
By 1301, however, Boniface had a new plan: He called in Charles de
Valois, powerful brother of the king of France, to help bring order to Tus»
cany. As Charles marched through northern Italy, and Florence seethed
with anxiety and fear, Dante quickly emerged as the man who could rally
THE \V(lL\'l:‘.‘s‘ \\4‘l)
Ull’. .<lIF.l£l’
Once upon (1 lime, the
wolves sent an embassy
10 the sheep. (lesiring
that there might be
peace between them for
the lime to come.
“Why." said they.
“should we be for ever
waging this deudlv
strife? Those wicked
dogs are the cause of
all; they are irtcersixnrly
barking at us, and
provoking us. Send
them away, and there
will be no longer any
obstacle to our etemul
friendship and peace.
"
The silly sheep listerml,
the dogs were
dlSmiSSt’d, and the
flock, thus deprived of
their best prmectors,
became an easy prey to
their treacherous
enemy.
FABLES.
A5501‘.
SIXTH CENTURY ac.
LAW 42 361
Tlli. l.l|"l' 1)!
l'lll€\.llST()( Ll-ZS
I’l‘h.vnzz'.czm:le:\- Iv] fellow
r.itizcns reached the
point at which their
jealousy nzade them
listen ro any slander at
his ¢’xp¢ws('. and so
/he] was forced to
remiml the unsemffly of
his tzvhievet-rtents mm‘!
I/zey could bear this no
longer. Hr: once mid to
those who were
cornplnirting ofhim:
“Why are you tired of
receiving benefits so
often from the same
mm? "
Besides this he
gave offense to the
people when he built
the temple 0
fArtemir.
for not only did he
style lht‘ goddms
A rtemis Aristmboule, or
Artemis wisest in coun-
.s‘eI~—wz't}t the hint thm
it was he who had
givmz the best counsel
to the Athcntulzs and
the Greekx—1mrhe
chose a me for it nmr
his own house at
Melite. . . .S0 at last the
A rhemkzrts bamlwlwrl
him. Titty made use of
the 0.$'fr£irIi.S‘I1I to
Izurnble his great reputation am! his (tut/1or~
fly, as Indeed was their
habit with any wlwre
power they regarded as
opprtvssive. or who had
risen to an eminencr
which they mttsidert-d
out of keeping with the
equality Ufa
zlemncravy.
run urr or
rt~mMts‘I'oct,t:s.
P! l.‘ l‘2\R(‘H.
C. .-Ll). 46—l2O
362 LAW 42
the people, arguing vehemently against appeasement and working desperately to arm the citizens and to organize resistance against the pope and
his puppet French prince. By hook or by crook, Boniface had to neutralize
Dante. And so, even as on the one hand he threatened Florence with
Charles de Valois, on the other he held out the olive branch, the possibility of negotiations, hoping Dante would take the bait. And indeed the Flov
rentines decided to send a delegation to Rome and try to negotiate a
peace. To head the mission, predictably, they chose Dante.
Some warned the poet that the wily pope was setting up a
trap to lure
him away, but Dante went to Rome anyway, arriving as the French army
stood before the gates of Florence. He felt sure that his eloquence and ma»
son would win the pope over and save the city. Yet when the pope met the
poet and the Florentine delegates, he instantly intimidated them, as he did
so many. “Fall on your knees before me!” he bellowed at their first meeting. “Submit to me! I tell you that in all truth I have nothing in my heart
but to promote your peace.” Succumbing to his powerful presence, the
Florentines listened as the pope promised to look after their interests. He
then advised them to return home, leaving one of their members behind
to continue the talks. Boniface signaled that the man to stay was to be
Dante. He spoke with the utmost politeness, but in essence it was an order.
And so Dante remained in Rome. And while he and the pope continued their dialogue, Florence fell apart. With no one to rally the Whites,
and with Charles de Valois using the pope’s money to bribe and sow dissension, the Whites disintegrated, some arguing for negotiations, others
switching sides. Facing an enemy now divided and unsure of itself, the
Blacks easily destroyed them within weeks, exacting violent revenge on
them. And once the Blacks stood firmly in power, the pope finally dismissed Dante from Rome.
The Blacks ordered Dante to return home to face accusations and
stand trial. When the poet refused, the Blacks condemned him to be
burned to death ifhe ever set foot in Florence again. And so Dante began
a miserable life of exile, wandering through Italy, disgraced in the city that
he loved, never to return to Florence, even after his death.
Interpretation
Boniface knew that if he only had a. pretext to lure Dante away, Florence
would crumble. He played the oldest card in the book—threatenix1g with
one hand while holding out the olive branch with the other»~—-and Dante
fell for it. Once the poet was in Rome, the pope kept him there for as long
as it took. For Boniface understood one of the principal precepts in the
game of power: One resolute person, one clisobedient spirit, can tum a
flock of sheep into a den of lions. So be isolated the troublemaker. Without the backbone of the city to keep them together, the sheep quickly
scattered.
Learn the lesson: Do not waste your time lashing out in all directions
at what seems to be a many-headed enemy. Find the one head that mat-
ters——t.he person with willpower, or smarts, or, most important of all,
charisma. Whatever it costs you, lure this person away, for once he is absent his powers will lose their effect. His isolation can be physical (banishment or absence from the court), political (narrowing his base of support),
or psychological (alienating him from the group through slander and insinuatiun). Cancer begins with a single cell; excise it before it spreads beyond cure.
KEYS TO POWER
In the past, an entire nation would be ruled by a king and his handful of
ministers. Only the elite had any power to play with. Over the centuries,
power has gradually become more and more diffused and democratized.
This has created, however, a common misperception that groups no
longer have centers of power——-that power is spread out and scattered
among many people. Actually, however, power has changed in its numbers but not in its essence. There may be fewer mighty tyrants command
ing the power of life and death over millions, but there remain thousands
of petty tyrants ruling smaller realms, and enforcing their will through indirect power games, charisma, and so on. In every group, power is concentrated in the hands of one or two people, for this is one area in which
human nature will never change: People will congregate around a single
strong personality like planets orbiting a sun.
To labor under the illusion that this kind of power center no longer
exists is to make endless mistakes, waste energy and time, and never hit
the target. Powerful people never waste time. Outwardly they may play
along with the game-—pretending that power is shared among manymbut
inwardly they keep their eyes on the inevitable few in the group who hold
the cards. These are the ones they work on, When troubles arise, they
look for the underlying cause, the single strong character who started the
stirring and whose isolation or banishment will settle the waters again.
In his fami1y~therapy practice, Dr. Milton H. Erickson found that if
the family dynamic was unsettled and dysfunctional there was inevitably
one person who was the stirrer, the troublemaker. In his sessions he would
symbolically isolate this rotten apple by seating him or her apart from the
others, if only by a few feet. Slowly the other family members would see
the physically separate person as the source of their difficulty. Once you
recognize who the stirrer is, pointing it out to other people will accomplish
a great deal. Understanding who controls the group dynamic is a critical
realization. Remember: Stirrers thrive by hiding in the group, disguising
their actions among the reactions of others. Render their actions visible
and they lose their power to upset.
A key element in games of strategy is isolating the enemy’s power. In
chess you try to comer the king. In the Chinese game of go you try to iso~
late the enemy’s forces in small pockets, rendering them immobile and ineffectual. It is often better to isolate your enemies than to destroy
LAW 42 363
364 2
LAW 49
them——you seem less brutal. The result, though, is the same, for in the
game of power, isolation spells death.
The most effective form of isolation is somehow to separate your victims from their power base. When Mao Tse—tung wanted to eliminate an
enemy in the ruling elite, he did not confront the person directly; be
silently and stealthily worked to isolate the man, divide his allies and turn
them away from him, shrink his support. Soon the man would vanish on
his own.
Presence and appearance have great import in the game of power. To
seduce, particularly in the beginning stages, you need to be constantly
present, or create the feeling that you are; if you are often out of sight, the
charm will wear oil”. Queen Ellzabeth’s prime minister, Robert Cecil,
had two main rivals: the queen’s favorite, the Earl of Essex, and her former favorite, Sir Walter Raleigh. He contrived to send them both on a
mission against Spain; with them away from the court he managed to
wrap his tentacles around the queen, secure his position as her top ad~
viser and weaken her affection for Raleigh and the earl. The lesson here
is twofold: First, your absence from the court spells danger for you, and
you should never leave the scene in a time of turmoil, for your absence
can both symbolize and induce a loss of power; second, and on the other
hand, luring your enemies away from the court at critical moments is a
great ploy.
Isolation has other strategic uses. When trying to seduce people, it is
often wise to isolate them from their usual social context. Once isolated
they are vulnerable to you, and your presence becomes magnified. Similarly, con artists often look for ways to isolate their marks from their nor
mal social milieux, steering them into new environments in which they
are no longer comfortable. Here they feel weak, and succumb to decep~
tion more easily. Isolation, then, can prove a powerful way of bringing
people under your spell to seduce or swindle them.
You will often find powerful people who have alienated themselves
from the group. Perhaps their power has gone to their heads, and they
consider themselves superior; perhaps they have lost the knack of communicating with ordinary folk. Remember: This makes them vulnerable.
Powerful though they be, people like this can be turned to use.
The monk Rasputin gained his power over Czar Nicholas and Czarina Alexandra of Russia through their tremendous isolation from the people. Alexandra in particular was a
foreigner, and especially alienated
from everyday Russians; Rasputin used his peasant origins to insinuate
himself into her good graces, for she desperately wanted to communicate
with her subjects. Once in the court’s inner circle, Rasputin made himself
indispensable and attained great power. Heading straight for the center,
he aimed for the one figure in Russia who commanded power (the czarina
dominated her husband), and found he had no need to isolate her for the
work was already done. The Rasputin strategy can bring you great power:
Always search out people who hold high positions yet who find them-
selves isolated on the board‘ They are like apples falling into your lap,
easily seduced, and able to catapult you into power yourself.
Finally, the reason you strike at the shepherd is because such an action will djshearten the sheep beyond any rational measure. When Hetnando Cortes and Francisco Pizarro led their tiny forces against the Aztec
and Incan empires, they did not make the mistake of fighting on several
fronts, nor were they intimidated by the numbers arrayed against them;
they captured the kings, Moctezuma and Atahualpa. Vast empires fell
into their hands. With the leader gone the center of gravity is gone; there
is nothing to revolve around and everything falls apart. Aim at the leaders, bring them down, and look for the endless opportunities in the confusion that will ensue.
Image: A Flock of Fatted
Sheep. Do not waste precious
time trying to steal a sheep or two; do
not risk life and limb by setting upon
the dogs that guard the flock. Aim at the
shepherd. Lure him away and the dogs
will follow. Strike him down and the flock will
scatter—you can pick them off one by one.
Authority: If you draw a bow, draw the
strongest. If you use an arrow, use the long~
est. To shoot a rider, first shoot his horse.
To Catch a gang of bandits, first capture
its leader. just as a
country has its
border, so the killing of men has its limits. If
the cnemy‘s attack can be stopped [with a
blow to the head], why have any more dead
and wounded than necessary? (Chinese
poet Tu Fu, Tang dynasty, eighth century)
LAW 42 365
366 LAW 42
REVERSAL
“Any harm you do to a man should be done in such a way that you need
not fear his revenge,” writes Machiavelli. If you act to isolate your enemy,
make sure he lacks the means to repay the favor. If you apply this Law, in
other words, apply it from a position of superiority, so that you have nothing to fear from his resentment.
Andrew Johnson, Abraham Lincoln’s successor as U.S. president,
saw Ulysses S. Grant as a troublesome member of his government. So he
isolated Grant, as a prelude to forcing him out. This only enraged the
great general, however, who responded by forming a
support base in the
Republican party and going on to become the next president. It would
have been far wiser to keep a man like Grant in the fold, where he could
do less harm, than to make him revengeful. And so you may often find it
better to keep people on your side, where you can watch them, than to
risk creating an angry enemy. Keeping them close, you can secretly whittle away at their support base, so that when the time comes to cut them
loose they will fall fast and hard without knowing what hit them.
43
VVC)Rl(()D$TT{EZ}IEAURTS
4APJ[)DAIT€I)S C)F CTTIIEI{S
jUDGMENT
Coercion cmates a reunion that will eventually work
against you. You must seduce others into wanting to
move in your Ilirectimt. A person you have seduced becomes your loyal pawn. And the way to seduce others is to
operate on their individual psychologies and weaknesses.
Soflen up the resistant by working on their emotions,
playing on what they hold dear and what they fear. Ig~
mne the heads and minds ofothers and they will grow to
hate you.
367
LYRI S ‘x’ Ill SI:
Thinking ofthc means
by which he could
nwsl effmrlively
pemmadv the Persians
to revolr, /Cyrus’s/
delihcemtionx led him to
adopt the following
plan, which he found
best suited to his
purpose. He wrote on a
roll ofparchmem‘ that
Axrya-gee had
appointed him ('0
coimnand (he Persian
army; (her: he
summoned an :zx.sernMy ofllze Persiarrs‘.
opened (he roll m their
presence and read mu
what he had written.
"And now, he added,
I have an order for
you: every man is to
appear on parade will:
a billimok. . . X‘
The order was obeyed.
All the men assembled
with their bilihooks,
and Cyrus maxi
comtnarzd was {hall
before Ike day was out
they should rlear a
Certain piece of mag}:
lam)’ full of them»
bushes, about eighleen
or twenty furlongs
Square. This too was
done, whereupon Cymx
zssued the further order
that they should
present themselves
again on the following
day, after having taken
a bath. Meanwhile,
Cyrus collected and
slaughtered all his
father's goals‘, sheep,
and oxen in preparation
for eliteztairtiug the
whole I’erxiun army at
a banquet, together
with the best wine and
bread he could procnm.
The next day (he guests
assemhled, and were
368 LAW 43
TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW
Near the end of the reign of Louis XV, all of France seemed desperate for
change. When the king’s grandson and chosen successor, the future Louis
XVI, married the fifteen-year-old daughter of the empress of Austria, the
French caught a glimpse of the future that seemed hopeful. The young
bride, Ma.rie~Antoinette, was beautiful and full of life. She instantly
changed the mood of the court, which was rank with Louis XV’s dc»
baucheries; even the common people, who had yet to see her, talked excitedly of Marie-Antoinette. The French had grown disgusted with the series
of mistresses who had dominated Louis XV, and they looked forward to
sewing their new queen. In 1773, when Marie-Antoinette publicly rode
through the streets of Paris for the first time, applauding crowds swarmed
around her carriage. “How fortunate,” she wrote her mother, “to be in a
position in which one can gain widespread affection at so little cost.”
In 1774 Louis XV died and Louis XVI took the throne. As soon as
Maxie-Antninette became queen she abandoned herself to the pleasures
she loved the most—-ordering and wearing the most expensive gowns and
jewelry in the realm; sporting the most elaborate hair in history, her
sculpted coiffures rising as much as three feet above her head; and throwing
a constant succession of masked balls and fétes. All of these whims she paid
for on credit, never concerning herself with the cost or who paid the bills.
Marie~Antoinette’s greatest pleasure was the creation and designing of
a private Garden of Eden at the Petit Trianon, a chéteau on the grounds of
Versailles with its own woods. The gardens at the Petit Trianon were to be
as “natural” as possible, including moss applied by hand to the trees and
rocks. To heighten the pastoral effect, the queen employed peasant milkmaids to milk the finestlooking cows in the realm; launderers and cheese
makers in special peasant outfits she helped design; shepherds to tend
sheep with silk ribbons around their necks. \'Vhen she inspected the bams,
she would watch her milkmaids squeezing milk into porcelain vases made
at the royal ceramic works. To pass the time, Ma.rie«Antoinette would
gather flowers in the woods around the Petit Trianon, or watch her “good
peasants” doing their “chores.” The place became a separate world, its
community limited to her chosen favofites.
With each new whim, the cost of maintaining the Petit Trianon soared.
Meanwhile. France itself was deteriorating: There was famine and wide
spread discontent. Even socially insulated courtiers seethed with resentment-—the queen treated them like children. Only her favorites mattered,
and these were becoming fewer and fewer. But Marie~Antoinette did not
concern herself with this. Not once throughout her reign did she read a
minister’s report. Not once did she tour the provinces and rally the people
to her side. Not once did she mingle among the Parisians, or receive a dc}
egation from them. She did none of these things because as queen she felt
the people owed her their affection, and she was not required to love them
in return.
In 1784 the queen became embroiled in a scandal. As part of an elaborate swindle, the most expensive diamond necklace in Europe had been
purchased under her name, and during the swindlers‘ trial her lavish
lifestyle became public: People heard about the money she spent onjewels
and dresses and masked dances. They gave her the nickname “Madame
Deficit,” and from then on she became the focus of the people‘s growing
resentment. When she appeared in her box at the opera the audience
greeted her with hisses. Even the court turned against her. For while she
had been running up her huge ezcpenditures, the country was headed for
rum.
Five years later, in 1789, an unprecedented event took place: the be
ginning of the French Revolution. The queen did not worry—-let the people have their little rebellion, she seemed to think; it would soon quiet
down and she would be able to resume her life of pleasure. That year the
people marched on Versailles, forcing the royal family to quit the palace
and take residence in Paris. This was a
triumph for the rebels, but it offered
the queen an opportunity to heal the wounds she had opened and establish
contact with the people. The queen, however, had not learned her lesson:
Not once would she leave the palace during her stay in Paris. Her subjects
could rot in hell for all she cared.
In 1792 the royal couple was moved from the palace to a prison, as the
revolution officially declared the end of the monarchy. The following year
Louis XVI was tried, found guilty, and guillotined. As Marie~Autoinette
awaited the same fate, hardly a soul came to her defense-—not one of her
former friends in the court, not one of Europe’s other monarchs (who, as
members of their own countries’ royal families, had all the reason in the
world to show that revolution did not pay), not even her own family in
Austria, including her brother, who now sat on the throne. She had be
come the world’s pariah. In October of 1793, she finally knelt at the guillotine, unrepentant and defiant to the bitter end.
Interpretation
From early on, Marie—Antoinette acquired the most dangerous of attitudes:
As a. young princess in Austria she was endlessly flattered and cajoled. As
the future queen of the French court she was the center of everyone’s attention. She never learned to charm or please other people, to become attuned to their individual psychologies. She never had to work to get her
way, to use calculafion or cunning or the arts ofpersuasion. And like everyone who is indulged from an early age, she evolved into a monster of insensitivity.
Marie-Antoinette became the focus of an entire country’s dissatisfaction because it is so infuriating to meet with a
person who makes no effort
to seduce you or attempt to persuade you, even if only for the purpose of
deception. And do not imagine that she represents a bygone era, or that
she is even rare. Her type is today more common than ever. Such types live
in their own bubble—they seem to feel they are born kings and queens,
and that attention is owed them. They do not consider anyone else’: nature, but bulldoze over people with the selfirighteous arrogance of a MarieAntoinette. Pampered and mdulged as children, as adults they still believe
told to sit down on the
gmis and enjoy
themselves. Afler the
meal Cyrus asked Ihem
which they pn'ferred—
yest:2rday’.s work or
today’; amusement;
and they replied that it
was indeed. a far cry
from the previous day ‘s
misery to their present
pleasures, 'l'hi.s‘ wax the
anywc-r which Cyrus
wtmlecl; he seized upon
it at once and
proceeded to lay bare
what he had in mind.
“Men of Persia," he
said, “listen to me: nhey
my orders, and you will
be able to enjoy a thou~
smtd pleasures as good
as this withum ever
turning your hands [0
menial labor.‘ but, if
you disobey, yesterday's task will he the
pattern of innumerable
others you will be
fU7‘t‘(’!l to perform. Take
my advice and win
yuurfreedom, lam the
man destined to undertake your liberation,
and at is my belief that
you are a march for the
Medes in war or in
ltvcrythirzg elm. It is 1/11’
truth I tell you. Do not
delay. but fling off the
yoke ofxhryagcs at
once.
"
The I’ersi¢m.9 had long
resented Iheil‘ subjec-
(ion to the Males. A:
last they hurl {amid a
(earlier, and welcomed
with enthusiasm the
pmspecr of liberty. . . .
On the [JYIESEIII ocrasinn
the Persians under
Cyrux r().\‘(! against the
Males and from then
onwards were rnaslers
ofA:ia.
me; HlS'i'ORlES,
llERUl)0'I‘U.‘i.
FIFTH CENTIZRY B.c..
LAW 4: 369
’H||: (1|';.\H.l. Mi‘:
ill‘ l’|‘.lKhll:\Sll)\
The north wind and the
sun were di.$‘[)lll£Ng
wiricie was the xtrmrger.
am! agreed to
acknowlt,*dg(' as the
victor wlzic 1: war of
them mold .vn‘i;) a
traveler ofhis clothing.
The wind trim!/irsl.
But its violent gum
only made the mar:
hold his rlntlms t/glztly
around him. and when
it blew harder will thr
cum made him so
m2r;ornj'mmbIe that he
pm on an extra wrap.
Evcwtllrz/Iy thr wind
go: rircd afiz and
}’lt1fllIL‘([ him over /0 the
sun. The sun shorwfirrl
wilh a moderate
warmth, wlzicrfz made
the man lake of)“hi.v
mpcuut. Tim: it blazed
/iercely. till, unable
10 slam! the heat.
he Mrippvd and went
offto bathe in a
nearby river:
Persuasion is more
cjfccti ve [hurl force.
i«'.wu~.s.
At~.s<>t'.
sum-1 mm 1 'R‘{ M‘.
370 LAW 43
that everything must come to them; convinced of their own charm, they
make no effort to charm, seduce, or gently persuade.
In the realm of power, such attitudes are disastrous. At all times you
must attend to those around you, gauging their particular psychology, tai—
loxing your words to what you know will entice and seduce them. This re
quires energy and art. The higher your station, the greater the need to
remain attuned to the hearts and minds ofthose below you, creating a base
of support to maintain you at the pinnacle. Without that base, your power
will teeter, and at the slightest change of fortune those below will gladly assist in your fall from grace.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
in A.D. 225, Chuko Liang, master strategist and chief minister to the ruler
ofShu in ancient China, confronted a dangerous situation. The kingdom of
Wei had mounted an all~out attack on Shu from the north. More dangerous
still, Wei had formed an alliance with the barbarous states to the south of
Shu, led by King Menghuo. Chuko Liang had to deal with this second
menace from the south before he could hope to fend off Wei in the north.
As Chuko Liang prepared to march south against the barbarians, a
wise man in his camp offered him advice. It would be impossible, this man
said, to pacify the region by force. Lizmg would probably beat Menghuo,
but as soon as he headed north again to deal with Wei, Menghuo would
reinvade. “It is better to win hearts," said the wise man, “than cities; better
to battle with hearts than with weapons. I hope you will succeed in winning
the hearts of these people.” “You read my thoughts,” responded Chuko
Liang.
As Liang expected, Menghuo launched a. powerful atm But Liang
laid a
trap and managed to capture a
large part ofMenghuds army, including the king himself. Instead ofpunishing or executing his prisoners, however, he separated the soldiers from their king, had their shackles removed,
regaled them with food and wine, and then addressed them. “You are all
upright men,” he said. “I believe you all have parents, wives, and children
waiting for you at home. They are doubtless shedding bitter tears at your
fate. I am going to release you, so that you can return home to your loved
ones and comfort them.” The men thanked Liang with tears in their eyes;
then he sent for Menghuo. “If 1 release you,” asked Liang, “what will you
do?” “I will pull my army together again,” answered the king, “and lead it
against you to a decisive battle. But if you capture me a second time, I will
bow to your superiority.” Not only did Liang order Menghuo released, he
gave him a gift of a horse and saddle. When angry lieutenants wondered
why he did this, Liang told them, “I can capture that man as easily as I can
take something out of my pocket. I am trying to win his heart. When I do,
peace will come of itself here in the south.”
As Menghuo had said he would, he attacked again. But his own officers, whom Liang had treated so well, rebelled against him, captured him,
and turned him over to Liang, who asked him again the same question as
before. Menghuo replied that he had not been beaten fairly, but merely betrayed by his own officers; he would fight again, but ifcaptured a third time
he would bow to Liang’s superiority.
Over the following months Liang outwitted Menghuo again and again,
capturing him a third, a
fourth, and a fifth time. On each occasion Meng—
huo’s troops grew more dissatisfied. Liang had treated them with respect;
they had lost their heart for fighting. But every time Chuko Liang asked
Menghuo to yield, the great king would come up with another excuse: You
tricked me, I lost through bad luck, on and on. If you capture me again,
he would promise, I swear I will not betray you. And so Liang would let
him go.
When he captured Menghuo for the sixth time, he asked the king the
same question again. “If you capture me a seventh time,” the king replied,
“I shall give you my loyalty and never rebel again.” “Very well,” said
Liang. “But if I
capture you again, I will not release you.”
Now Menghuo and his soldiers fled to a far corner of their kingdom,
the region ofWuge. Defeated so many times, Menghuo had only one hope
left: He would ask the help ofKing Wutugu of Wuge, who had an immense
and ferocious army. Wutugu’s warriors wore an armor of tightly woven
vines soaked in oil, then dried to an impenetrable hardness. With
Menghuo at his side, Wutugu marched this mighty army against Liang, and
this time the great strategist seemed frightened, leading his men in a hurried relreat. But he was merely leading Wutugu into a
trap: He cornered
the king’s men in a narrow valley, then lit fires set all around them. When
the fires reached the soldiers Wutugu’s whole army burst into flame-the
oii in their armor, of course, beinghighly flammable. All of them perished.
Liang had managed to separate Mengliuo and his entourage from the
carnage in the valley, and the king found himself a captive for the seventh
time. After this slaughter Liang could not bear to face his prisoner again.
He sent a messenger to the captured king: “He has commissioned me to release you. Mobilize another army against him, if you can, and try once
more to defeat him.” Sobbing, the king fell to the ground, crawled to Liang
on his hands and knees, and prostrated himself at his feet. “Oh great minister,” cried Menghuo, “yours is the majesty of Heaven. We men of the south
will never again olier resistance to your rule.” “Do you now yield?” asked
Liang. “I, my sons, and my grandsons are deeply moved by Your Hon0r’s
boundless, lifegiving mercy. How could we not yield?”
Liang honored Menghuo with a great banquet, reestablished him on
the throne, restored his conquered lands to his rule, then returned north
with his army, leaving no occupying force. Liang never came back—he had
no need to: Menghuo had become his most devoted and unshakable ally.
Interpretation
Chuko Liang had two options: Try to defeat the barbarians in the south
with one crushing blow, or patiently and slowly win them to his side over
time. Most people more powerful than their enemy grab the first option
and never consider the second, but the truly powerful think far ahead: The
The men who have
changed the l.tI1iv(,’rS!'
have newer gotten there
by working on Iecrdery,
but rather by moving
the nza.s‘.ve.s“. Working on
lcartrrs is the method of
intrigue and only lozurlx
to s:t4.':)r111(1r_\1 rmlaltx.
Working on the rrm<r5c'5.
however, is the srroke
ofgenius mm charxges
the fam nfthc world.
NAY()LE().‘*- l3i)NAPAR 31- .
1769 i821
l.lI«‘|7, ill’ Al.lCV \\l)I'.Ii
'l‘ll|~. (.l(l‘.:\'l
This long and pzlirzfizi
[111 mu"I of I)arz'ns—-—for
in rlevm days he
nuzrched 33 htmdrczl
fi4rIurzgx—~l1ura.v.w(l his
xm‘zJ'£cr.\‘ so rim! most of
them were ready‘ to give
it up, L-hicfly for mm!
of water. While they
were in this rimrexzsz it
lmppened that .\‘f)!’I1£’
Macedoniimr who had
fetched Willi?! in skins
upon their mules from
:1 river they had /(mm!
out came about noon
to the phnce where
Alexander wax. and
seeing him almost
irlmkod with Ihirxt.
pmwnily filled zr helmet
(rm! oflered it him. . . .
Then he look the
hzimer mm his hands.
and looking round
about when he saw all
those who were near
him .\'l!(’l€}¢fIzg their
heads out and looking
earnestly after the
drink. he returned it
again wixh (hanks
LAW 43 371
without tax-ting (I
drop ofit.
"For.”.s'ui([ he, “ifl
(1[(}Il(?.S‘HUu/J drink. the
rest will be out of
heurr. "
The .\'oldier.s' no
.mum:r wok notice of
his temperance and
mugmmimny upon this
m:ca.uun, but they one
and «ii (‘I‘i§%d out to him
to lead them fnrmml
lioiciix. and began
wlzipping on their
horses. For whzlvr mm»
hm! such :2 king they
said they Ala/led both
wezirinesx and (I1ir.s‘l.
and lcmkcil upon rherrr
.s'clw.\' to be little less
than Immortal.
‘rm. Lll*l- or
.'\I,l..\A’~:l1l«.R‘|‘lll~Z ouuxl‘.
P1m:z\m'H.
C A.n. 46-120
372 ‘
LAW 43
first option may be quick and easy, but over time it brews ugly emotions in
the hearts of the vanquished. Their resentment turns to hatred; such animosity keeps you on edge~—you spend your energy protecting what you
have gained, growing paranoid and defensive. The second option, though
more difficult, not only brings you peace of mind, it converts a potential
enemy info a pillar of support.
In all your encounters, cake a step back—-take the time to calculate and
attune yourself to your targets’ emotional makeup and psychological weaknesses. Force will only strengthen their resistance. ‘With most people the
heart is the key: They are like children, ruled by their emotions. To soften
them up, alternate harshness with mercy. Play on their basic fears, and also
their loves——freeclom, family, etc. Once you break them down, you will
have a
lifelong friend and fiercely loyal ally.
Governments saw men only in mass; but our men, being irregulars, were not
formations, but individuals. . . . Our kingdoms lay in each manis mind.
Scvcn Pillars of Wisdom, T‘. 1;. Lawrence, 1888-1935
KEYS TO POWER
In the game ofpower, you are surrounded by people who have absolutely
no reason to help you unless it is in their interest to do so. And if you have
nothing to offer their selfiinterest, you are likely to make them hostile, for
they will see in you just one more competitor, one more waster of their
time. Those that overcome this prevailing coldness are the ones who find
the key that unlocks the stra.nger’s head and mind, seducing him into their
corner, if necessary sofiening him up for a punch. But most people never
learn this side of the game. Vlrhen they meet someone new, rather than
stepping back and probing to see what makes this person unique, they talk
about themselves, eager to impose their own willpower and prejudices.
They argue, boast, and make a show of their power. They may not know it
but they are secretly creating an enemy, a
resistor, because there is no
more infuriating feeling than having your individuality ignored, your own
psychology unacknowledged. It makes you feel lifeless and resentful.
Remember: The key to persuasion is softening people up and breaking them down, gently. Seduce them with a
two—pronged approach: Work
on their emotions and play on their intellectual weaknesses. Be alert to
both what separates them from everyone else (their individual psychology)
and what they share with everyone else (their basic emotional responses).
Aim at the primary emotions——love, hate, jealousy. Once you move their
emotions you have reduced their control, making them more vulnerable to
persuasion.
When Chuko Liang wanted to dissuade an important general of a rival
kingdom from entering into an alliance with Ts’ao Ts’ao, Liang’s dreaded
enemy, he did not detail "rm; Ts’ao’s cruelty, or attack him on moral
grounds. Instead Liang suggested that Ts’ao Ts’ao was really after the gen»
eral’s beautiful young wife. This hit the general in the gut, and won him
over. Mao Tse—tung similarly always appealed to popular emotions, and
spoke in the simplest terms. Educated and well—rea.d himself, in his
speeches he used visceral metaphors, voicing the public’s deepest amdelies
and encouraging them to vent their frustrations in public meetings. Rather
than arguing the practical aspects of a. particular program, he would de~
scribe how it would affect them on the most primitive, down—to—earth level.
Do not believe that this approach works only with the illiterate and unsch0oled—it works on one and all. All of us are mortal and face the same
dreadful fate, and all of us share the desire for attachment and belonging.
Stir up these emotions and you captivate our hearts.
The best way to do this is with a dramatic jolt, of the kind that Chuko
Liang created when be fed and released prisoners who expected only the
worst from him. Shaking them to the core, he softened their hearts. Play on
contrasts like this: Push people to despair, then give them relief. If they ex~
pect pain and you give them pleasure, you win their hearts. Creating pleasure of any kind, in fact, will usually bring you success, as will allaying fears
and providing or promising security.
Symbolic gestures are often enough to win sympathy and goodwill. A
gesture of self—sacri.fice, for example--a show that you suffer as those
around you do—will make people identify with you, even if your suffering
is symbolic or minor and theirs is real. When you enter a
group, make a
gesture ofgoodwill; soften the group up for the harsher actions that will follow later.
When T. E. Lawrence was fighting the Turks in the deserts of the Middle East during World War I, he had an epiphany: It seemed to him that
Conventional warfare had lost its value. The old-fashioned soldier was lost
in the enormous amiies of the time, in which he was ordered about like a
lifeless pawn. Lawrence wanted to turn this around. For him, every soldier’s mind was a kingdom he had to conquer. A committed, psychologically motivated soldier would fight harder and more creatively than a.
puppet.
Lawrence’s perception is still more true in the world today, where so
many of us feel alienated, anonymous, and suspicious of authority, all of
which makes overt power plays and force even more counterproductive
and dangerous. Instead ofmanipulating lifeless pawns, make those on your
side convinced and excited by the cause you have enlisted them in; this
will not only make your work easier but it will also give you more leeway
to deceive them later on. And to accomplish this you need to deal with
their individual psychologies. Never clumsily assume that the tactic that
worked on one person will necessarily work on another. To find the key
that will motivate them, first get them to open up. The more they talk, the
more they reveal about their likes and dislikes--the handles and levers to
move them with.
The quickest way to secure people’s minds is by demonstrating, as
simply as possible, how an action will benefit them. Self—interest is the
LAW 43
‘
3'73
37'4 LAW 43
strongest motive of all: A great cause may capture minds, but once the firs:
flush of excitement is over, interest will flag--unless there is something to
be gained. Self-interest is the solider foundation. The causes that work best
use a noble veneer to cover a blatant appeal to self-interest; the cause seduces but the self-interest secures the deal.
The people who are best at appealing to people’s minds are often
artists, intellectuals, and those of a more poetic nature. This is because
ideas are most easily communicated through metaphors and imagery. It is
always good policy, then, to have in your pocket at least one artist or intel~
lectual who can appeal concretely to people’s minds. Kings have always
kept a stable of writers in their ham: Frederick the Great had his Voltaire
(until they quaneled and separated), Napoleon won over Goethe. Conversely, Napoleon III’s alienation ofwriters such as Victor Hugo, whom he
exiled from France, contributed to his growing unpopularity and eventual
downfall. It is dangerous, then, to alienate those who have powers of ex»
pression, and useful to pacify and exploit them.
Finally, learn to play the numbers game‘ The wider your support base
the stronger your power. Understanding that one alienated, disaffected
soul can spark a blaze of discontent, Louis XIV made sure to endear himself to the lowest members of his staff. You too must constantly win over
more allies on all levels-we time will inevitably come when you will need
them.
lm age :
The Keyhole.
People build
walls to keep you
out; never force
your way in —-
you
will find only more
walls within walls.
There are doors in
these walls, doors to
the heart and mind, and
they have tiny keys
holes Peer through the
keyhole, find the key
that opens the door,
and you have access
to their will with
no ugly signs
of forced
e n tr y.
Authority: The difiiculties in the way of persuasion he in my kn0w—
ing the heart of the persuaded in order thereby to fit my wording
into it. . . . For this reason, whoever attempts persuasion before
the throne, must carefully observe the sovereigrfs feelings of love
and hate, his secret wishes and fears, before he can conquer
his heart. (Hawfeivtzu, Chinese philosopher, third century BC.)
REVERSAL
There is no possible reversal to this Law.
LAW 43 375
375
44
DISARM AND INFURIATE
WITH THE MIRROR EFFECT
jUDGMENT
The mirrorreflects reality, but it is alxo the perfect toalfor
deception: When you minm your enemies, doing exactly
as they do, they cannotfigure out your strategy. The Mir1m*Efi"ect mocks and humiliates them, making them overreact. By holding up a mirmr to thelrpsyches, you seduce
them with the illusion that you share their values; by
holding up a mirror to their actions, you teach them a
lesson. Fm: can resist the power of she MirmrEflecil
MIRROR EFFECTS: Preliminary Typology
Mirrors have the power to disturb us. Gazing at our reflection in the mir~
rot, we most often see what we want to see—the image of ourselves with
which we are most comfortable. We tend not to look too closely, ignoring
the wrinkles and blemishes. But if we do look hard at the reflected image,
we sometimes feel that we are seeing ourselves as others see us, as a
person
among other people, an object rather than a subject. That feeling makes us
shudder—we see ourselves, but from the outside, minus the thoughts,
spirit, and soul that fill our consciousness. We are a
thing.
In using Mirror Efiects we symbolically re—create this disturbing power
by mirroring the actions of other people, mimicking their movements to
unsettle and infuriate them. Made to feel mocked, cloned, objectlike, an
image without a soul, they get angry. Or do the same thing slightly differ’
ently and they might feel disarmed—you have perfectly reflected their
wishes and desires. This is the narcissism: power of mirrors. In either case,
the Mirror Efiect unsettles your targets, whether angering or entrancing
them, and in that instant you have the power to manipulate or seduce
them. The Effect contains great power because it operates on the most
primitive emotions.
There are four main Mirror Effects in the realm of power:
The Neutralizing Eflect. In ancient Greek mythology, the Gorgon
Medusa had serpents for hair, protruding tongue, massive teeth, and a face
so ugly that anyone who gazed at her was turned into stone, out of fright.
But the hero Perseus managed to slay Medusa by polishing his bronze
shield into a mirror, then using the reflection in the mirror to guide him as
he crept up and cut off her head without looking at her directly. If the
shield in this instance was a mirror, the mirror also was a kind of shield:
Medusa could not see Perseus, she saw only her own reflected actions, and
behind this screen the hero stole up and destroyed her.
This is the essence of the Neutralizing Eifect: Do what your enemies
do, following their actions as best you can, and they cannot see what you
are up to—they are blinded by your mirror. Their strategy for dealing with
you depends on your reacting to them in a way characteristic of you; new
tralize it by playing a
game of mimicry with them. The tactic has a mock—
ing, even infuriating effect. Most of us remember the childhood experience
of someone teasing us by repeating our words exactly-—after a while, usually not long, we wanted to punch them in the face. Working more subtly
as an adult, you can still unsettle your opponents this way; shielding your
own strategy with the mirror, you lay invisible traps, or push your opponents into the trap they planned for you.
This powerful technique has been used in military strategy since the
days of Sun-tzu; in our own time it often appears in political campaigning.
It is also useful for disguising those situations in which you have no particular strategy yourself. This is the Wa.rn‘or’s Mirror.
A reverse version of the Neutralizing Effect is the Shadow: You
T! HE Ml;‘R(1lHl\ X‘ A I)
ll IS .\I)
A cermin merclmm
once had a great desire
to make a long journey.
Now in regard /hat he
was not very weal/hy.
“I! Ls‘ rsquisi1e,"sai:1‘ he
to Fzimselfi “that before
my departure 1 should
leave xonzre part afmy
chute in the city, 10 the
and that ifI meet with
ill luck in my Iruverls,
I may have wherewithal
to keep me in my
return.
"
To this purpose
he delivered a great
number 0/"bars ofiron,
which were a principal
part ofhis wealth, in
trust to one ofhis
friends, desiring him to
keep them during Ins:
absence; and then,
mking his leave, away
he went. Some time
after, having had but lll
luck in his travels, he
remnled lzom«,' and the
firs: thing he did was to
go to his friend, and
demand his iron: but
his friend, who owed
several sums vfmonev,
having sold the iron to
pay his own debts,
made him (ink answer.‘
“Tmly, friend,
"
said he,
"'1 put your iron into (1
mom that was (‘last
locked, imagining it
would have been there
(IS S€[.'LiH:‘ 03' WE)’ (7WI1
gold; but an accident
has itappened wlnirh
no one could ha we
suspected, for them was
a rat in the room wlzich
are i1 all up.
”
The merclzam.
pretending zgnorarwe,
replied, "I! is a terrible
misfmnme I0 me
indem';buI1 know of
LAW 44 377
old Illa! rats love in»:
extmm srly; I have
sufferer] lay them many
tirnm hr-fnrv m the mmv
rmmrzer, and !hc'r0j'ore
cam rlw hatter hem my
prrnwznl affliction. "
‘fills’ answer extremely
pl£?u.$‘(:(l Ilzr fnenri, who
was glad to hear the
mwclmm so well
irzciizwd to brlicvc rim!
11 mt had eaten his iron;
and In remuw all
suspicions. desired him
to dz’/ui will: him the
next day. The mrrciumt
prcrmised he would, but
in the mvanlime he met
in the middle ufrho City
one oflH'.\' friemfs chil-
:1rm;rhe rhilzi he
carried home. and
iortkml up in 11 mrmz.
The next clay he went to
his frimrl. who secnmzl
to be in great af]Iir:1im1..
which he asked him the
<:ml.\‘t’ of as ifhe fwd
been perfr¢¢rtl_v igrmnmr
of whm /Md lmppeneri.
“O, my dmrfrimd, "
mrswzrml the other, ‘'I
beg you to excuse me. if
you do not set’ me so
cheerful as otherwise
I would be; I have lost
one of my zzlzildrrm;
I have hurl him cried by
.murz(I oftmmprez, but
I know mu what is
l7(’(‘1'IIll£’ ufhim. "
"0f"mplir,'dIl1zr
rmrclmnl. “I am gricvczl
m lwar thir;_/hr
yesterday in (lav
evmxlrzg, as I pm'n3(l
from henure, I saw an
owl in 1/10 air with a
child in his claws; [Jul
\&'lll(’flt(H‘ it were your.»
1 ("armor It-Ii. "
"Why, you most foolish
and tIl)b‘llI’£l crwrure."
ntplivrl (hr fricml, "are
you not axlianzed to ml!
such an eg:‘¢»gi0a.s' lie?
An om’. thul weighs in
.777‘? A
LAW 44
shadow your opponents’ every move without their seeing you. Use the
Shadow to gather information that will neutralize their strategy later on,
when you will be able to thwart their every move. The Shadow is effective
because to follow the movements of others is to gain valuable insights into
their habits and routines. The Shadow is the preeminent device for detectives and spies.
The Narcissus Eflect. Gazing at an image in the waters of a pond, the
Greek youth Narcissus fell in love with it. And when he found out that the
image was his own reflection, and that he therefore could not consummate
his love, he despaired and drowned himself. All of us have a similar problem: We are profoundly in love with ourselves, but since this love excludes
a love object outside ourselves, it remains continuously unsatisfied and unfulfilled. The Narcissus Effect plays on this universal narcissism: You look
deep into the souls of other people; fathom their inmost desires, their values, their tastes, their spirit; and you reflect it back to them, making yourself into a kind of mirror image. Your ability to reflect their psyche gives
you great power over them; they may even feel a
tinge of love.
This is simply the ability to mimic another person not physically, but
psychologically, and it is immensely powerful because it plays upon the
unsatisfied se1f—love of a child. Normally, people bombard us with their experiences, their tastes. They hardly ever make the effort to see things
through our eyes. This is annoying, but it also creates great opportunity: If
you can show you understand another person by reflecting their inmost
feelings, they will be entranced and disarmed, all the more so because it
happens so rarely. No one can resist this feeling of being harmoniously reflected in the outside world, even though you might well be manufacturing
it for their benefit, and for deceptive purposes of your own.
The Narcissus Effect works wonders in both social life and business; it
gives us both the Seducer’s and the Coum'er’s Mirror.
The Moral Effect. The power of verbal argument is extremely limited,
and often accomplishes the opposite of what is intended. As Gracién remarks, “The truth is generally seen, rarely heard.” The Moral Effect is a
perfect way to demonstrate your ideas through action. Quite simply, you
teach others a lesson by giving them a taste of their own medicine.
In the Moral Effect, you mirror what other people have done to you,
and do so in a way that makes them realize you are doing to them exactly
what they did to you. You make them feel that their behavior has been unpleasant, as opposed to hearing you complain and whine about it, which
only gets their defenses up. And as they feel the result of their actions mir~
rored back at them, they realize in the profoundest sense how they hurt or
punish others with their unsocial behavior. You objectify the qualifies you
want them to feel ashamed of and create a mirror in which they can gaze at
their follies and learn a lesson about themselves. This technique is often
used by educators, psychologists, and anyone who has to deal with un-
pleasant and unconscious behavior. This is the Teacher’s Mirror. Vifhether
or not there is actually anything wrong with the way people have treated
you, however, it can often be to your advantage to reflect it back to them in
a way that makes them feel guilty about it.
The Hallucinatory Effect. Mirrors are tremendously deceptive, for they
create a sense that you are looking at the real world. Actually, though, you
are only staring at a piece of glass, which, as everyone knows, cannot show
the world exactly as it is: Everything in a mirror is reversed. When Alice
goes through the looking glass in Lewis Ca.rroll’s book, she enters a world
that is back~to—front, and more than just visually.
The Hallucinatory Effect comes from creating a perfect copy of an object, a place, a
person. This copy acts as a kind of dummy—-people take it
for the real thing, because it has the physical appearance of the real thing.
This is the preeminent technique of con artists, who strategically mimic the
real world to deceive you. It also has applications in any arena that re
quires camouflage. This is the Deceiver’s Mirror.
OBSERVANCES OF MIRROR EFFECTS
Observance I
In February of 1815, the emperor Napoleon escaped from the island of
Elba, where he had been imprisoned by the allied forces of Europe, and returned to Paris in a match that stirred the French nation, rallying troops
and citizens of all classes to his side and chasing his successor, King Louis
XVIII, off the throne‘ By March, however, having reestablished himselfin
power, he had to face the fact that France’s situation had gravely changed.
The country was devastated, he had no allies among the other European
nations, and his most loyal and important ministers had deserted him or
left the country. Only one man remained from the old regin-ie—joseph
Fouché, his former minister of police.
Napoleon had relied on Fouché to do his dirty work throughout his
previous reign, but he had never been able to figure his minister out. He
kept a
corps of agents to spy on all of his ministers, so that he would always
have an edge on them, but no one had gotten anything on Fouché. If sus~
pected of some miscleed, the minister would not get angry or take the accusation personally—he would submit, nod, smile, and change colors
chameleonlike, adapting to the requirements of the moment. At first this
had seemed somewhat pleasant and charming, but after a while it frustrated Napoleon, who felt outdone by this slippery man. At one time or an
other he had fired all of his most important ministers, including Talleyrand,
but he never touched Fouché. And so, in 1815, back in power and in need
of help, he felt he had no choice but to reappoint Fouché as his minister of
police.
Several weeks into his new reign, Napoleorfs spies told him they beIVNIAI I101 GPJOVE [H50 97
rhree pow:/ls, can he
curry a buy (hm weighs
above fifty?
"
"Why." replied thy
men;/zant, “do you
make such a wonder m
Ihw? As ifin a
rnuntry
|4«"'H’V(‘ Dill? 7/1! (‘(1/1 (‘III II
hundrml tum" weigh]
ofirim, it were such a
wonder for an uwl to
carry :2 child that
weiglix not ovcrjijly‘
pounds in all!" The
frieml, upon this. foam!
that the mnrcimrxt was
no such foot as he took
him to be, begged his
pardon for the client
wlzirh he dtzrigrzed to
have put upon him.
I’€Sl(}I‘e‘d him the value
of his Iran, and iv had
his ‘
11 again.
I'All(,l-ES,
l’l|.l‘.-\Y,
1.~u>m,
mmrm (‘t~‘.N'mRY
Whm yzm have form:
to grips and are striv—
mg together with the
enemy. and you realize
Ihal you mnnot
advance, you “.rm1kin"
and become one with
the erzemy. You can win
by applying a suitable
mtlznique while you
are mutually entangled.
. . . You can win u/ken
decisively with the
advantage of knowing
how to "soak "
into the
enemy, whereas‘. were
you to draw apart, you
would {me 11:: cimnce
to win.
A soon or-'1-we RINGS,
MIYAMOTO M1:sAsm,
JAPAN,
SF,‘/FNTF,F.NTH (‘F NTURY
LAW 44 379
TIIIC (“UV /\'\I)
'|HlI filfllik
Um’ day Mr. Fox
(l£’(‘iti(',{I to fmk out
And invite old Mrs.
Stork (ml.
The rliimcr W1.l.\'I1‘!
elaborateBeiiig Imbituullv mean,
He tliilrflt go in for
I’lUlliL' l'lll.\‘l-NCT
In fact it crm.s‘iS(:’d of/1
vlmllow plate
Ofrhin gruiri.
Within ii minute
Our jokrr hail lapped
his plate clean:
Meanwhile his J,-ims/.
/ishmg away with
Iwr beak,
Got not 11 morxel in it
To pay him imrrkfnr
this cruel Prai,'Iirai
[aka the Mark invitud
The /‘ox to dinner the
fiillowing wiI(4A‘.
“l xhoulzl be
delighted,"
Hr replied;
“When it t‘rmu'.s‘ In
frimiit I never immi
upon pride‘.
"
Punctztally on my
day he ran
To his ho.s’(ct\‘s'.»' hiiiise
and at once began
I’rai.\‘ing everything."
"
What time.’ What chic!
Ami [ht/f4mcl—iImi('
just to (1 mm!"
Then sat down with a
hmrly appetite
(I7o,mv we always‘
ready to (car)
And mvored the deli-
(‘i()ll.Y smelt ofmeat.
It was‘ f1liIlL’€¢ih1L’Iltt,lII(i
St’I‘Vt’ti—iU serve
him right./—
In a
i(!rlg-Il€‘.(f’<'.t’[i,
Imrrow-nmtitlxzrd um.
Thu smrk. (,’lL\'ily
xmoping,
Ifnjoyerl hflffi/i
With her long bill:
Hl.V snout, though.
380 LAW 44
lieved Fouché was in secret contact with ministers of foreign countries, including Metvernich of Austria. Afraid that his most valuable minister was
betraying him to his enemies, Napoleon had to find out the truth before it
was too late, He could not confront Fouché directly—in person the man
was as slippery as an eel. He needed hard proof.
This seemed to come in April, when the emperor’s private police cap
tured a Viennese gentleman who had come to Paris to pass infonnation on
to Fouché. Ordering the man brought before him, Napoleon threatened to
shoot him then and there unless he confessed; the man broke down and
admitted he had given Fouché a letter from Metternich, written in invisible
ink, arranging for a secret meeting of special agents in Basel. Napoleon arscordingly ordered one of his own agents to infiltrate this meeting. IfFouché
was indeed planning to betray him, he would finally be caught red-handed
and would hang.
Napoleon waited impatiently for the agent’s return, but to his bewilderment the agent showed up days later reporting that he had heard nothing that would implicate Fouché in a
conspiracy. In fact it seemed that the
other agents present suspected Fouché of double-crossing them, as if he
were working for Napoleon all along. Napoleon did not believe this for an
instant—Fouché had somehow outwitted him again.
The following morning Fouché visited Napoleon, and remarked, “By
the way, sire, I never told you that I had a letter from Metternich a few
days ago; my mind was so full of things of greater moment. Besides, his
emissary omitted to give me the powder needed to make the writing legible. . . . Here at length is the letter.” Sure that Fouché was toying with him,
Napoleon exploded, “You are a traitor, Fouché! I ought to have you
hanged.” He continued to harangue Fouché, but could not fire him without
proof. Fouché only expressed amazement at the emperor’s words, but inwardly he smiled, for all along he had been playing a mirroring game.
Interpretation
Fouché had known for years that Napoleon kept on top of those around
him by spying on them day and night. The minister had survived this game
by having his own spies spy on Napoleon’s spies, thus neutralizing any action Napoleon might take against him. In the case of the meeting in Basel,
he even turned the tables: Knowing about Napoleorfs double agent, he set
it up so that it would appear as ifFouché were a
loyal double agent too.
Fouché gained power and flourished in a period of great tumult by
mirroring those around him. Duning the French Revolution he was a radical jacobin; after the Terror he became a moderate republican; and under
Napoleon he became a committed imperialist whom Napoleon ennobled
and made the duke of Otranto. IfNapoleon took up the weapon of digging
up dirt on people, Fouché made sure he had the dirt on Napoleon, as well
as on everyone else. This also allowed him to predict the emperor’s plans
and desires, so that he could echo his boss’s sentiments before he had even
uttered them. Shielding his actions with a mirror strategy, Fouché could
also plot offensive moves without being caught in the act.
This is the power of mirroring those around you. First, you give people
the feeling that you share their thoughts and goals. Second, if they suspect
you have ulterior motives, the mirror shields you from them, preventing
them from figuring out your strategy. Eventually this will infuriate and unsettle them. By playing the double, you steal their thunder, suck away their
initiative, make them feel helpless. You also gain the ability to choose when
and how to unsettle them—anot.her avenue to power. And the mirror saves
you mental energy: simply echoing the moves of others gives you the
space you need to develop a strategy of your own.
Observance II
Early on in his career, the ambitious statesman and general Alcibiades of
Athens (450—404 8.0) fashioned a formidable weapon that became the
source of his power. In every encounter with others, he would sense their
moods and tastes, then carefully tailor his words and actions to mirror their
inmost desires. He would seduce them with the idea that their values were
superior to everyone else’s, and that his goal was to model himself on them
or help them realize their dreams. Few could resist his charm.
The first man to fall under his spell was the philosopher Socrates. Alcibiades represented the opposite ofthe Socratic ideal of simplicity and uprightness: He lived lavishly and was completely unprincipled. Whenever
he met Socrates, however, he mirrored the older man’s sobriety, eating
simply, accompanying Socrates on long walks, and talking only of philosophy and virtue. Socrates was not completely fooled——he was not unaware
of Alcibiades’ other life. But that only made him vulnerable to a
logic that
flattered him: Only in my presence, he felt, does this man submit to a. virtuous influence; only I have such power over him. This feeling intoxicated
Socrates, who became Alcibiades’ fervent admirer and supporter, one day
even risking his own life to rescue the young man in battle.
The Athenians considered Alcibiades their greatest orator, for he had
an uncanny ability to tune in to his audience’s aspirations, and mirror their
desires. He made his greatest speeches in support of the invasion ofSicily,
which he thought would bring great wealth to Athens and limitless glory to
himself. The speeches gave expression to young Athenians’ thirst to com
quer lands for themselves, rather than living off the victories of their a.nces~
tors. But he also tailored his words to reflect older men's nostalgia for the
glory years when Athens led the Greeks against Persia, and then went on to
create an empire. All Athens now dreamed of conquering Sicily; Alcibiades’ plan was approved, and he was made the expedition’s commander.
While Alcibiades was leading the invasion ofSicily, however, certain
Athenians fabricated charges against him of profaning sacred statues. He
knew his enemies would have him executed if he returned home, so at the
last minute he deserted the Athenian fleet and defected to Athens’s bitter
enemy, Sparta. The Spartans welcomed this great man to their side, but
they knew his reputation and were wary of him. Alcibiades loved luxury;
the Spartans were a warrior people who worshipped austerity, and they
were afraid he would corrupt their youth. But much to their relief, the Al~
being me wrong
.i"hup1' and size,
II(' had In return to
his den
Empryalmllietl, tail
dragging. ears
rlrouping,
As rec! in 1/wfacc as a
[at who’: been caught
by a hen.
sri l‘:(.‘TFD F-AHLIL5.
.ll'AN ma LA l"(l\'TAlNf<,
ltfll 46195
Till‘, l’I‘ltl,0lM'J)
l.K'l"l'l»ZH
When I with to find (ml
how wisr, or how
.s‘lup-id, or how good, or
how u/it:/«€11 is (my am’.
or what are his
thzmglzls at the
moment, I
/in-lziun the
e.\/Jrc-.s*.si(m ufmyfuce.
as accurately as pu.r.n'-
He, in arcordrzncc with
the e.\:pre.tsion ofiris
am‘! then wait to see
what rlmugkts or semimcms arise in my liilfld
or /wan, as ifto match
or correspond wirh the
ax/Jressiurt.
J:‘o<;».R Ax LAN Pow,
l80‘)~1K4‘)
LAW 44
A
381
1.()Rl~.\‘/.0 llli‘ \l!-ZDIIII
f~l"l)l ill-"h T339" 1’(ll’l~'
l.urwi:u [1l1¢' .’Vl¢3di1'i/
(or! rm up/mrtunily of
im,‘rva.w‘in;: I/Le Il’.\‘pl’(‘l
which Pup? Imxnrwm
now felifm him and of
gaming his friem1.vhip,
z‘j'pu.s:»*ii:Ie his a/]’eczz‘un.
He tank the trouble tr»
Aisuzvtrr 1/11’ Pope iv
tt1Stt’S and nrululgml
(hem uccunlingly. He
rem ham . . .u1.sks' of
Izirfuvourirc wine. . . .
Ht: rem him (i0!iF!1?(Ili_\'.
flazterilzg letters in
which hf’ assured him,
when Ihe Pope mm‘ ill,
that he [all his .mj]'ering.\ as lhough they
were }1i.\‘ nwn. in which
he enctoumgvri hull
with .\'m‘h forlzfying
flaremmts as “:1 Pope
is what he willy to be,"
and in which, as
though imvdenmlly, he
im:/mlr*a’ his views on
the proper course of
pupal policies. Innocmt
war gralzfied Ivy
Lqirerzzrfs azleniérlns
and convinced by his
argumenrx . . . So
cmnpleiely, mdeed. did
he (mile to .\‘/tare his
opinions that, as the
dixgnmrlerl F«*rrar«'.w>
mnI)u.\:smlor put it,
“/he Pupw .\'[H*,]1.v with
the eyes nfthe Magnifirem Lorenz: '
iur. mum:
or‘ ,\Al,-tum.
Us RIM: rum FALL.
CnR|5'H)PuER Hmmzm.
I980
38.? LAW 44
cibiacles who arrived in Sparta was not at all what they expected: He wore
his hair untfimmed (as they did), took cold baths, ate coarse bread and
black broth, and wore simple clothes. To the Spartans this signified that he
had come to see their way of life as superior to the Athenian; greater than
they were, he had chosen to be a Spartan rather than being born one, and
should thus be honored above all others. They fell under his spell and
gave him great powers. Unfortunately Alcibiades rarely knew how to
rein in his cha.rm—he managed to seduce the king of Spaxtafs wife and
make her pregnant. When this became public he once more had to flee
for his life.
This time Alcibiades defected to Persia, where he suddenly went from
Spartan simplicity to embracing the lavish Persian lifestyle down to the last
detail. It was of course immensely flattering to the Persians to see a Greek
of Alcibiades’ stature prefer their culture over his own, and they showered
him with honors, land, and power. Once seduced by the mirror, they failed
to notice that behind this shield Alcibiades was playing a double game, secretly helping the Athenians in their war with Sparta and thus reingrafiab
ing himself with the city to which he desperately wanted to remm, and
which welcomed him back with open arms in 408 B.C.
Interpretation
Early in his political career, Alcibiades made a discovery that changed his
whole approach to power: He had a colorful and forceful personality, but
when he argued his ideas strongly with other people he would win over a
few while at the same time alienating many more. The secret to gaining as»
cendancy over large numbers, he came to believe, was not to impose his
colors but to absorb the colors of those around him, like a chameleon.
Once people fell for the trick, the decepfions he went on to practice would
be invisible to them.
Understand: Everyone is wrapped up in their own narcissistic shell.
When you try to impose your own ego on them, a wall goes up, resistance
is increased. By mirroring them, however, you seduce them into a kind of
narcissistic rapture: They are gazing at a double of their own soul. This
double is actually manufactured in its entirety by you. Once you have used
the mirror to seduce them, you have great power over them.
It is worth noting, however, the dangers in the promiscuous use of the
mirror. In Alcibiades’ presence people felt larger, as if their egos had been
doubled. But once he left, they felt empty and diminished, and when they
saw him mirroring completely different people as totally as he had mirrored them, they felt notjust diminished but betrayed. Alcibiades’ overuse
of the Mirror Effect made whole peoples feel used, so that he constantly
had to flee from one place to another. indeed Alcibiades so angered the
Spartans that they finally had him murdered. He had gone Loo far. The Seducer’s Mirror must be used with caution and discrimination.
Observance III
In 1652 the recently widowed Baroness Mancini moved her family from
Rome to Paris, where she could count on the influence and protection of
her brother Cardinal Mazatin, the French prime minister. Of the
baroness’s five daughters, four dazzled the court with their beauty and high
spirits. These infamously charming nieces of Cardinal Mazarin became
known as the Mazarinettes, and soon found themselves invited to all the
most important court functions.
One daughter, Marie Mancini, did not share this good fortune, for she
lacked the beauty and grace of her sisters——who, along with her mother
and even Cardinal Mazarin, eventually came to dislike her, for they felt
she spoiled the family image. They tried to persuade her to enter a. convent, where she would be less of an embarrassment, but she refused. Instead she applied herself to her studies, learning Latin and Greek,
perfecting her French, and practicing her musical skills. On the rare occasions when the family would let her attend court affairs, she trained herself
to be an artful listener, sizing people up for their weaknesses and hidden
desires. And when she finally met the future King Louis XIV, in 1657
(Louis was seventeen years old, Marie eighteen), she decided that to spite
her family and uncle, she would find a way to make this young man fall in
love with her.
This was a seemingly impossible task for such a plainloolcing girl, but
Marie studied the future king closely. She noticed that her sisters’ frivolity
did not please him, and she sensed that he loathed the scheming and petty
politicldng that went on all around him. She saw that he had a romantic nature-——he read adventure novels, insisted on marching at the head of his
armies, and had high ideals and a passion for glory. The court did not feed
these fantasies of his; it was a banal, superficial world that bored him.
The key to Louis’s heart, Marie saw, would be to construct a mirror reflecting his fantasies and his youthful yeamings for glory and romance. To
begin with she immersed herself in the romantic novels, poems, and plays
that she knew the young ldng read voraciously. When Louis began to engage her in conversation, to his delight she would talk of the things that
stirred his soul——not this fashion or that piece of gossip, but rather courtly
love, the deeds of great knights, the nobility of past kings and heroes. She
led his thirst for glory by creating an image of an august, superior king
whom he could aspire to become. She stirred his imagination.
As the future Sun King spent more and more time in Matie’s presence,
it eventually became clear that he had fallen in love with the least likely
young woman of the court. To the horror of her sisters and mother, he
showered Marie Mancini with attention. He brought her along on his militaiy campaigns, and made a show of stationing her where she could watch
as he marched into battle. He even promised Marie that he would marry
her and make her queen.
Mazarin, however, would never allow the king to many his niece, a
woman who could bring France no diplomatic or royal alliances. Louis had
to marry a princess of Spain or Austria. In 1658 Louis succumbed to the
pressure and agreed to break off the first romantic involvement of his life.
He did so with much regret, and at the end of his life he acknowledged that
he never loved anyone as much as Marie Mancini.
Wittgcnsteiri had an
ertrmmlim/(iv gift for
tiivinirrg {he Ilmuglnts
of the person with
whom he was cngagra’
in di.rcu.v.siLm While the
other srruggled to put
his thrmg/it imu wurzly,
Vriitge/z.s-rein would
/ierctviw what it was
um1.tIa1c itfar lzim.
Tins power n/Iuls;
which .S'()m(‘!lfi’l('.\'
sacrum umzzzrx/iv, was
inside ;)ossibI<r, I am
xure. by his own
prolonged and murmunus I‘r'.\‘c*arc/16.3‘.
Luowu; Wl‘l“I‘(§liNS'l’HI\:
A Memom.
NORMA): NlAl.(‘()!.M_
1958
The doctor should be
opaque m [1116 /mriemr.
and like a mirror,
slmuid show lftem
nmhing but what is
shrzwrx I0 him.
SIGMUN1) Faun),
l856—l939
LAW 4 4 383
384 LAW 41¢
Interpretation
Marie Mancini played the seducer’s game to perfection. First, she took a
step back, to study her prey. Seduction often fails to get past the first step
because it is too aggressive; the first move must always be a retreat. By
studying the king from a distance Marie saw what distinguished him from
others»-—his high ideals, romantic nature, and snobbish disdain for petty
politics. Marie’s next step was to make a mirror for these hidden yearnings
on Louis’s part, letting him glimpse what he himself could be——-a godlike
king!
This mirror had several functions: Satisfying Louis’s ego by giving him
a double to look at, it also focused on him so exclusively as to give him the
feeling that Marie existed for him alone. Surrounded by a pack of schem~
ing courtiers who only had their own self—interest at heart, he could not fail
to be touched by this devotional focus. Finally Marie-’s mirror set up an
ideal for him to live up to: the noble knight of the medieval court. To a soul
both romantic and ambitious, nothing could be more intoxicating than to
have someone hold up an idealized reflection of him. In effect it was Marie
Mancini who created the image of the Sun King——indeed Louis later ad»
mitted the enormous part she had played in fashioning his radiant self»
image.
This is the power of the Seducefs Mirror: By doubling the tastes and
ideals of the target, it shows your attention to his or her psychology, an attention more charming than any aggressive pursuit. Find out what sets the
other person apart, then hold up the mirror that will reflect it and bring it
out of them. Feed their fantasies of power and greatness by reflecting their
ideals, and they will succumb.
Observance IV
In 1538, with the death of his mother, Helena, the eight-year-old future
czar Ivan IV (or Ivan the Terrible) of Russia became an orphan. For the
next five years he watched as the princely class, the boyars, terrorized the
country. Now and then, to mock the young Ivan, they would make him
wear a crown and scepter and place him on the throne. VVhen the little
boy's feet dangled over the edge of the chair, they would laugh and lift him
off it, handing him from man to man in the air, making him feel his help
lessness compared to them.
When Ivan was thirteen, he boldly murdered the boyar leader and ascended to the throne. For the next few decades he struggled to subdue the
boyars’ power, but they continued to defy him. By 1575 his efforts to transform Russia and defeat its enemies had exhausted him. Meanwhile, his
subjects were complaining bitterly about his endless wars, his secret police,
the unvanquished and oppressive boyars. His own ministers began to question his moves. Finally he had had enough. In 1564 he had temporarily
abandoned the throne, forcing his subjects to call him back to power. Now
he took the strategy a
step further, and abdicated.
To take his place Ivan elevated a general of his, Simeon Bekbulatovich,
to the throne. But although Simeon had recently converted to Christianity,
he was by birth a Tartar, and his enthronement was an insult to Ivan’s subjects, since Russians looked down on the Tartars as inferiors and infidels.
Yet Ivan ordered that all Russians, including the boyars, pledge obedience
to their new ruler. And while Simeon moved into the Kremlin, Ivan lived
in a humble house on Moscow’s outskirts, from which he would sometimes
\n‘sit the palace, bow before the throne, sit among the other boyars, and
humbly petition Simeon for favors.
Over time it became clear that Simeon was a kind of kings double. He
dressed like Ivan, and acted like Ivan, but he had no real power, since no
one would really obey him. The boyars at the court who were old enough
to remember taunting Ivan when he was a boy, by placing him on the
throne, saw the connection: They had made Ivan feel like a weak pretender, so now he mirrored them by placing a weak pretender of his own
on the throne.
For two long years Ivan held the mirror of Simeon up to the Russian
people. The mirror said: Your whining and disobedience have made me a
czar with no real power, so I will reflect back to you a czar with no real
power. You have treated me disrespectfully, so I will do the same to you,
making Russia the laughingstock of the world. In 1577, in the name of the
Russian people, the chastised boyars once again begged Ivan to return to
the throne, which he did. He lived as czar until his death, in 1584, and the
conspiracies, complaining, and second—guessing disappeared along with
Simeon.
Interpretation
In 15 64, after threatening to abdicate, Ivan had been granted absolute powers. But these powers had slowly been chipped away as every sector of society—the boyars, the church, the government—vied for more control.
Foreign wars had exhausted the country, internal bickering had increased,
and Ivan’s attempts to respond had been met with scorn. Russia had turned
into a kind of boisterous classroom in which the pupils laughed openly at
the teacher. If he raised his voice or complained, he only met more resistance. He had to teach them a lesson, give them a taste of their own medicine. Simeon Bekbulatovich was the mirror he used to do so.
After two years in which the throne had been an object of ridicule and
disgust, the Russian people learned their lesson. They wanted their czar
back, conceding to him all the dignity and respect that the position should
always have commanded. For the rest of his reign, Russia and Ivan got
along fine.
Understand: People are locked in their own experiences. When you
whine about some insensitivity on their part, they may seem to understand,
but inwardly they are untouched and even more resistant. The goal of
power is always to lower people’s resistance to you. For this you need
tricks, and one trick is to teach them a lesson.
Instead ofharanguing people verbally, then, create a kind of mirror of
their behavior, In doing so you leave them two choices: They can ignore
LAW 44
386 LAW 44
you, or they can start to think about themselves. And even if they ignore
you, you will have planted a seed in their unconscious that will eventually
take root. When you mirror their behavior, incidentally, do not be afraid to
add a touch of caricature and exaggeration, as Ivan did by enthroning a
TaItar—it is the little spice in the soup that will open their eyes and make
them see the ridiculousness in their own actions.
Observance V
Dr. Milton H. Erickson, a pioneer in strategic psychotherapy, would often
educate his patients powerfully but indirectly by creating a kind of mirror
effect. Constructing an analogy to make patients see the truth on their own,
he would bypass their resistance to change. When Dr. Erickson treated
married couples complaining of sexual problems, for instance, he often
found that psychotherapy’s tradition of direct confrontation and problemairing only heightened the spouses’ resistance and sharpened their differences. Instead, he would draw a husband and wife out on other topics,
often banal ones, trying to find an analogy for the sexual conflict.
In one couple’s first session, the pair were discussing their eating
habits, especially at dinner. The wife preferred the leisurely approach——a
drink before the meal, some appetizers, and then a small main course, all at
a slow, civilized pace. This frustrated the husband-—he wanted to get dinner over quickly and to dig right into the main course, the bigger the better.
As the conversation continued, the couple began to catch glimpses of an
analogy to their problems in bed. The moment they made this connection,
however, Dr. Erickson would change the subject, carefully avoiding a discussion of the real problem.
The couple thought Erickson was just getting to know them and would
deal with the problem directly the next time he saw them. But at the end of
this first session, Dr. Erickson directed them to arrange a dinner a few
nights away that would combine each person’s desire: The wife would get
the slow meal, including time spent bonding, and the husband would get
the big dishes he wanted to eat. Without realizing they were acting under
the doctor’s gentle guidance, the couple would walk into a mirror of their
problem, and in the mirror they would solve their problems themselves,
ending the evening just as the doctor had h0ped—by mirroring the improved dinner dynamics in bed.
In dealing with more severe problems, such as the schizophrenids
mirror fantasy world of his or her own construction, Dr. Erickson would always try to enter the mirror and work within it, He once treated a hospital
inmate who believed he was Jesus Christ-—draping sheets around his
body, talking in vague parables, and bombarding staff and patients with
endless Christian proselytizing. No therapy or drugs seemed to work, until
one day Dr. Erickson went up to the young man and said, “I understand
you have had experience as a carpenter.” Being Christ, the patient had to
say that he had had such experience, and Erickson immediately put him to
work building bookcases and other useful items, allowing him to wear his
Jesus garb. Over the next weeks, as the patient worked on these projects,
his mind became less occupied with Jesus fantasies and more focused on
his labor. As the carpentry work took precedence, a psychic shift took effect: The religious fantasies remained, but faded comfortably into the background, allowing the man to fimction in society.
Interpretation
Communication depends on metaphors and symbols, which are the basis
of language itself. A metaphor is a kind of mirror to the concrete and real,
which it often expresses more clearly and deeply than a literal description
does. When you are dealing with the intractable willpower of other people,
direct communication often only heightens their resistance.
This happens most clearly when you complain about people’s behavior, particularly in sensitive areas such as their lovemaking. You will effect
a. far more lasting change if, like Dr. Erickson, you construct an analogy, a
symbolic mirror of the situation, and guide the other through it. As Christ
himself understood, talking in parables is often the best way to teach a lesson, for it allows people to realize the truth on their own.
When dealing with people who are lost in the reflections of fantasy
worlds (including a host of people who do not live in mental hospitals),
never try to push them into reality by shattering their mirrors. Instead,
enter their world and operate inside it, under their rules, gently guiding
them out of the hall ofmirrors they have entered.
Observance VI
The great sixteenth~century Japanese tea master Takeno Sho~o once
passed by a house and noticed a. young man watering flowers near his front
gate. Two things caught Sho—o’s attention——first, the graceful] way the man
performed his task; and, second, the stunningly beautiful rose of Sharon
blossoms that bloomed in the garden. He stopped and introduced himself
to the man, whose name was Sen no Rikyu. Sho—o wanted to stay, but he
had a
prior engagement and had to hnny off. Before he left, however,
Rikyu invited him to take tea with him the following morning. Sho-o happily accepted.
When Sho—o opened the garden gate the next day, he was horrified to
see that not a single flower remained. More than anything else, he had
come to see the rose ofSharon blossoms that he had not had the time to ap
preciate the day before; now, disappointed, he started to leave, but at the
gate he stopped himself, and decided to enter Sen no Rikyu’s tea room. Immediately inside, he stopped in his tracks and gazed in astonishment: Before him a vase hung from the ceiling, and in the vase stood a single rose of
Sharon blossom, the most beautiful in the garden. Somehow Sen no Rikyu
had read his guesfs thoughts, and, with this one eloquent gesture, had
demonstrated that this day guest and host would be in perfect harmony.
Sen no Rikyu went on to become the most famous tea. master of all,
and his trademark was this uncanny ability to harmonize himself with his
guests’ thoughts and to think one step ahead, enchanting them by adapting
to their taste.
One day Rjkyu was invited to tea by Yamashina Hechigwan, an adLAW 44
‘
38-1
z
358 LAW 44
miter of the tea ceremony but also a man with a vivid sense of humor.
When Rikyu arrived at Hechigwan’s home, he found the garden gate shut,
so he opened it to look for the host. On the other side of the gate he saw
that someone had first dug a ditch, then carefully covered it over with canvas and earth. Realizing that Hechigwan had planned a practical joke, he
obligingly walked right into the ditch, muddying his clothes in the process.
Apparently horrified, Hechigwan came running out, and hurried
Rikyu to a bath that for some inexplicable reason stood already prepared.
Afier bathing, Rikyu joined Hechigwan in the tea ceremony, which both
enjoyed immensely, sharing a
laugh about the accident. Later Sen no
Rikyu explained to a friend that he had heard about Hechigwan’s practical
joke beforehand, “But since it should always be one’s aim to conform to
the wishes of one’s host, I fell into the hole knowingly and thus assured the
success of the meeting. Tea is by no means mere obsequiousness, but there
is no tea where the host and guest are not in harmony with one another.”
Hechigwan’s vision of the dignified Sen no Rikyu at the bottom of a ditch
had pleased him endlessly, but Rikyu had gained a pleasure of his own
in complying with his host’s wish and watching him amuse himself in
this way.
Interpretation
Sen no Rikyu was no magician or seer~—-he watched those around him
acutely, plumbing the subtle gestures that revealed a hidden desire, then
producing that desire’s image. Although Sho—o never spoke of being enchanted by the rose of Sharon blossoms, Rikyu read it in his eyes. If mirroring a person’s desires meant falling into a ditch, so be it. Rikyu’s power
resided in his skillful use of the Courtier’s Mirror, which gave him the appearance of an unusual ability to see into other people.
Learn to manipulate the Courtier’s Mirror, for it will bring you great
power. Study people’s eyes, follow their gestures—-«surer barometers ofpain
and pleasure than any spoken word. Notice and remember the details-«the
clothing, the choice of friends, the daily habits, the tossed-out remarks-—
that reveal hidden and rarely indulged desires. Soak it all in, find out what
lies under the surface, then make yourself the mirror of their unspoken
selves. That is the key to this power: The other person has not asked for
your consideration, has not mentioned his pleasure in the rose of Sharon,
and when you reflect it back to him his pleasure is heightened because it is
unasked for. Remember: The wordless communication, the indirect com~
pliment, contains the most power. No one can resist the enchantment of the
Courtier’s Mirror.
Observance Vll
Yellow Kid Weil, con artist extraordinaire, used the Deceiver’s Mirror in
his most brilliant cons. Most audacious of all was his recreation of a bank
in Muncie, Indiana. When Weil read one day that the Merchants Bank in
Muncie had moved, he saw an opportunity he could not pass up.
Well rented out the original Merchants building, which still contained
bank furnitnure, complete with teller windows. He bought money bags,
stenciled a bank’s invented name on them, filled them with steel washers,
and arrayed them impressively behind the teller windows, along with bundles of boodlevwreal bills hiding newspaper cut to size. For his banl<’s staff
and customers Weil hired gamblers, bookies, girls from local bawdy
houses, and other assorted confederates. He even had a local thug pose as a
bank dick.
Claiming to be the broker for a certificate investment the bank was offering, Weil would fish the waters and hook the proper wealthy sucker. He
would bring this man to the bank and ask to see the president. An “officer”
of the bank would tell them that they had to wait, which only heightened
the realism of the con-——one always has to wait to see the bank president.
And as they waited the bank would bustle with banklike activity, as call
girls and bookies in disguise floated in and out, making deposits and with»
drawals and tipping their hats to the phony bank dick. Lulled by this per~
feet copy of reality, the sucker would deposit $50,000 into the fake bank
without a worry in the world.
Over the years Weil did the same thing with at deserted yacht club, an
abandoned brokerage office, a relocated real estate office, and a com»
pletely realistic gambling club.
Interpretation
The mirroring of reality offers immense deceptive powers. The right uni»
form, the perfect accent, the proper props——the deception cannot be deci~
phered because it is enmeshed in a simulation of reality. People have an
intense desire and need to believe, and their first instinct is to trust a. well»
constructed facade, to mistake it for reality. After all, we cannot go around
doubting the reality of everything we seewthat would be too exhausting.
We habitually accept appearances, and this is a credulity you can use.
In this particular game it is the first moment that counts the most. If
your suckers’ suspicions are not raised by their first glance at the mirror’s
reflection, they will stay suppressed. Once they enter your hall of mirrors,
they will be unable to distinguish the real from the fake, and it will become
easier and easier to deceive them. Remember: Study the world’s surfaces
and learn to mirror them in your habits, your manner, your clothes. Like a
carnivorous plant, to unsuspecting insects you will look like all the other
plants in the field.
Authority: The task of :1 military operation is to accord de<:ep~
tively with the intentions of the enemy . . .
get to what they want
first, subtly anticipate them. Maintain discipline and adapt to
the enemy. . . . Thus, at first you are like a maiden, so the enemy
opens his door; then you are like a rabbit on the loose, so
the enemy cannot keep you out. (Stm—tzu, fourth century B.C.)
LAW 44 , .‘)’89
390 LAW 44
Image: The
Shield of Perseus. It is polished into a
reflecting mirror.
Medusa cannot see you, only her
own hideousness reflected back at her.
Behind such a mirror you can de~
ceive, mock, and infuriate. With
one blow you sever Medusa’s
unsuspecting head.
A WARNING: BEWARE OF MIRRORED SITUATIONS
Mirrors contain great power but also dangerous reefs, including the mix»
rored situation--a situation that seems to reflect or closely resemble a
pre
vious one, mostly in style and surface appearance. You can often back into
such a situation without fully understanding it, while those around you understand it quite well, and compare it and you to whatever happened before. Most often you suffer by the comparison, seeming either weaker than
the previous occupant of your position or else tainted by any unpleasant
associations that person has lefi behind.
In 1864 the composer Richard Wagner moved to Munich at the behest
of Ludwig 11, known variously as the Swan King or the Mad King of
Bavaria. Ludwig was Wagner‘s biggest fan and most generous patron. The
strength ofhis support turned Wagner’s head»-<mce established in Munich
under the king's protection, he would be able to say and do whatever he
wanted.
Wagner moved into a lavish house, which the king eventually bought
for him. This house was but a stone’s throw from the former home of Lola
Montez, the notorious courtesan who had plunged Ludwig II’s grandfather
into a crisis that had forced him to abclicate. Warned that he could be infected by this association, Wagner only scoffed-——-“I am no Lola Montez,"
he said. Soon enough, however, the citizens of Munich began to resent the
favors and money showered on Wagner, and dubbed him “the second
Lola,” or “Lolotte.” He unconsciously began to tread in Lo1a’s footstepsspending money extravagantly, meddling in matters beyond music, even
dabbling in politics and advising the king on cabinet appointments. Meanwhile Ludwigs affection for Wagner seemed intense and undignified for a
l-:ing——just like his grandfather’s love for Lola Montez.
Eventually Ludwig’s ministers wrote him a letter: “Your Majesty now
stands at a fateful parting of the ways: you have to choose between the love
and respect of your faithful people and the ‘friendship’ of Richard Wagner.” In December of 1865, Ludwig politely asked his friend to leave and
never return. Wagner had inadvertently placed himself in Lola Montez’s
reflection. Once there, everything he did reminded the stolicl Bavariams of
that dread woman, and there was nothing he could do about it.
Avoid such association-effects like the plague. In a mirrored situation
you have little or no control over the reflections and recollections that will
be connected to you, and any situation beyond your control is dangerous.
Even if the person or event has positive associations, you will suffer from
not being able to live up to them, since the past generally appears greater
than the present. If you ever notice people associating you with some past
event or person, do everything you can to separate yourself from that
memory and to shatter the reflection.
LAW 44 39 I
45
PR£HkC}iTT{EIVEEHD
F()R,CIiAIJCH3,BIJT
PJE\/EI{I{EFT3I{hd
TT)C)h4LH3fIflEF()DH3E
JUDGMENT
Everyone understands the need for change in the air
stract, but on the day-to-day level people are creatures of
habit. Too much innovation is traumatic, and will head
to revolt. Ifyou an: new to a position ofpower, or an outside?" trying to build a power base, make a show of respecting the old way of doing things. If change it
necessary, make it feel like a gentle improvement on the
past.
TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW
Sometime in the early 1520s, King Henry VIII of England decided to divorce his wife, Catherine of Aragon, because she had failed to beat him a
son, and because he had fallen in love with the young and comely Anne
Boleyn. The pope, Clement VII, opposed the divorce, and threatened the
king with excommunication. The king’s most powerful minister, Cardinal
Wolsey, also saw no need for divorce—-—-and his halfhearted support of the
king cost him his position and soon his life.
One man in Hem-y’s cabinet, Thomas Cromwell, not only supported
him in his desire for a divorce but had an idea for realizing it: a complete
break with the past. He convinced the king that by severing ties with Rome
and making himself the head of a newly formed English church, he could
divorce Catherine and marry Anne. By I531 Henry saw this as the only solution. To reward Cromwell for his simple but brilliant idea, he elevated
this son of a blacksmith to the post of royal councillor.
By 1534 Cromwell had been named the king’s secretary, and as the
power behind the throne he had become the most powerful man in England. But for him the break with Rome went beyondthe satisfaction of the
l<ing‘s carnal desires: He envisioned a new Protestant order in England,
with the power of the Catholic Church smashed and its vast wea.lth in the
hands of the king and the government. In that same year he initiated a
complete survey of the churches and monasteries of England. And as it
turned out, the treasures and moneys that the churches had accumulated
over the centuries were far more than he had imagined; his spies and
agents came back with astonishing figures.
To justify his schemes, Cromwell circulated stories about the corruption in the English monasteries, their abuse of power, their exploitation of
the people they supposedly served. Having won Parliamenfs support for
breaking up the monasteries, he began to seize their holdings and to put
them out of existence one by one. At the same time, he began to impose
Protestantism, introducing reforms in religious ritual and punishing those
who stuck to Catholicism, and who now were called heretics. Virtually
overnight, England was converted to a new official religion.
A terror fell on the country. Some people had suffered under the
Catholic Church, which before the reforms had been immensely powerful,
but most Britons had strong ties to Catholicism and to its comforting rituals. They watched in horror as churches were demolished, images of the
Madonna and saints were broken in pieces, stainedglass windows were
smashed, and the churches’ treasures were confiscated. With monasteries
that had succored the poor suddenly gone, the poor now flooded the
streets. The growing ranks of the beggar class were further swelled by for
mer monks. On top ofall this, Cromwell levied high taxes to pay for his ec«
clesiastical reforms.
In 1535 powerful revolts in the North of England threatened to topple
Henry from his throne. By the following year he had suppressed the rebellions, but he had also begun to see the costs of Cromwell’s reforms. The
king himself had never wanted to go this far-—-he had only wanted a di-
\‘€’t|HRF. (IHRH-l'l‘M«\S
(EAR/Iii l’ll0,’vl
Celebrating [he mm of
the year IL!‘ an ancient
custom. The Roman:
celebmled the SummaIia. the festival of
Saturn, god ofzhe
Ixarvesr, between
December I 7 and 23. 11
was the max! clzeerful
festival of lhe year. All
work and comrm'rt;e
str,-ppcd, and the streets
were filled with crowds
and u mmival armorphcre. Slaves were
Iemfzonzrily freed, and
the houses were decorated with laurel
branches. People
visited one another,
1)ringirzg gifts of wax
rtnmllas‘ and little clav
figurines.
Long Iwfore the birth
of Clirirt, the Jews r,e=,ls--
bruletl an rig/It-Ila}:
Festillul of Liglm [at
the same .s‘ea.mn/, am? it
is believed that the
(icrmzmic p1€0;')(4r.s‘ held
a gram fexzivezl not only
at /nizlsumnzer but also
at the winter roisrivse,
when they cc! ebmred
the rebirth of the mm
am! hrmoretl the great
frrrzility gods Wotan
and Frey/a. Dnmzr
(Thor) am! Freyr. Even
a‘/icr the Ernperor
Cmzstalltine 1.4.0.
50(>—«337) declared
Ch rimarzity to be
Rome's nffirial imperial religion. (he evocation zlflig/‘II imrl
fertility as’ an impomzm
<‘0mpon¢'m ofpreChris/far: midwimter
Ct"l€brl1iir)n.£‘ could not
be emirely suppressed.
In 1110 year 274 the
Roman Emperor /lure‘
liar: {A.D. 2I4~275) hml
establixlictl an r)/finial
LAW 45 393
cull of the sun-god
Mithms. declaring his
birthday. December 25,
ll nalionul holiday. The
cult of Mxthras, the
Aryan god 0/‘light, had
spread from Pt,’f’Sl(1
through Asia Minor to
Grenv, Rome, and as
far as the Germanic
lands and Britain.
Numerous ruins ofhis
shrines still testify to
the high regard in
which [his god was
held, especially by the
Roman legions, as a
hringcr offcrtility,
peace, and victory.
So it was a (‘lever rzmve
when. in 1110 year A.[).
354. the Christian
church under Pope
l,ibcrius (352-366) coUplezl the hirlhday of
Mithras and declared
December 25 to be
the bmhriay
oflesus Christ.
NE!!!-; zuucnmz
7:: mm.
ANNE,-S1 /\N\‘li
RIs<'1-mi-1.
DF.<‘E£MBl:R 25. 1983
394 LAW 45
vorce. It was now Cromwell’s turn to watch uneasily as the king began
slowly to undo his reforms, reinstating Catholic sacraments and other rituals that Cromwell had outlawed.
Sensing his fall from grace, in 1540 Cromwell decided to regain
Henry’s favor with one throw of the dice: He would End the king a new
wife. Henry’s third wife, Jane Seymour, had died a few years before, and
he had been pining for a new young queen. It was Cromwell who found
him one: Anne of Cleves, a German princess and, most important to
Cromwell, a Protestant. On Crornwell’s commission, the painter Holbein
produced a
flattering portrait of Anne; when Henry saw it, he fell in love,
and agreed to marry her. Cromwell seemed back in favor.
Unfortunately, however, Holbein’s painting was highly idealized, and
when the king finally met the princess she did not please him in the least.
His anger against Cromwell—f1rst for the ill~conceived reforms, now for
saddling him with an unattractive and Protestant wife-—could no longer be
contained. InJune of that year, Cromwell was arrested, charged as a Protestant extremist and a heretic, and sent to the Tower. Six weeks later, before a
large and enthusiastic crowd, the public executioner cut off his head.
Interpretation
Thomas Cromwell had a simple idea: He would break up the power and
wealth of the Church and lay the foundation for Protestantism in England.
And he would do this in a. mercilessly short time. He knew his speedy reforms would cause pain and resentment, but he thought these feelings
would fade in a few years. More important, by identifying himself with
change, he would become the leader of the new order, making the king de
pendent on him. But there was a problem in his strategy: Like a billiard
ball hit too hard against the cushion, his reforms had reactions and caroms
he did not envision and could not control.
The man who initiates strong reforms often becomes the scapegoat for
any kind of dissatisfaction. And eventually the reaction to his reforms may
consume him, for change is upsetting to the human animal, even when it is
for the good. Because the world is and always has been full of insecurity
and threat, we latch on to familiar faces and create habits and rituals to
make the world more comfortable. Change can be pleasant and even
sometimes desirable in the abstract, but too much of it creates an anxiety
that will stir and boil beneath the surface and then eventually erupt.
Never underestimate the hidden conservatism of those around you. It
is powerful and entrenched. Never let the seductive charm of an idea cloud
your reason: just as you cannot make people see the world your way, you
cannot wrench them into the future with painful changes. They will rebel.
If reform is necessary, anticipate the reaction against it and find ways to
disguise the change and sweeten the poison.
OBSERVANCE. OF THE LAW
As a
young Communist in the 19203, Mao Tsetung understood better than
any of his colleagues the incredible odds against a Communist victory in
China. With their small numbers, limited funds, lack of military experience, and small arsenal of weapons, the Party had no hope of success unless it won over China’s immense peasant population. But who in the
world was more conservative, more rooted in tradition, than the Chinese
peasantry? The oldest civilization on the planet had a history that would
never loosen its power, no matter how violent the revolution. The ideas of
Confucius remained as alive in the 19203 as they had been in the sixth century B.C., when the philosopher was alive, Despite the oppressions of the
current system, would the peasantry ever give up the deep~rooted values of
the past for the great unknown of Communism?
The solution, as Mao saw it, involved a simple deception: Cloak the
revolution in the clothing of the past, making it comforting and legitimate
in people’s eyes. One of Mao’s favorite books was the very popular me
dieval Chinese novel 77:: Water Margin, which recounts the exploits of a
Chinese Robin Hood and his robber band as they struggle against a corrupt and evil monarch. In China in Mao’s time, family ties dominated over
any other kind, for the Confucian hierarchy of father and oldest son remained firmly in place; but The Witter Margin preached a superior valuethe fraternal ties of the band ofrobbers, the nobility of the cause that unites
people beyond blood. The novel had great emotional resonance for Chi~
nese people, who love to root for the underdog. Time and again, then,
Mao would present his revolutionary army as an extension of the robber
band in The I'V1terMargz'n, likening his struggle to the timeless conflict between the oppressed peasantry and an evil emperor. He made the past
seem to envelop and legitimize the Communist cause; the peasantry could
feel comfortable with and even support a
group with such roots in the past.
Even once the Party came to power, Mao continued to associate it with
the past. He presented himself to the masses not as a Chinese Lenin but as
a. modem Chuko Liang, the real»life third-century strategist who figures
prominently in the popular historical novel The Romance ofthe Wtree King~
dams. Liang was more than a great general—he was a
poet, a philosopher,
and a
figure of stem moral rectitude. So Mao represented himself as a
poetwanior like Liang, a man who mixed strategy with philosophy and
preached a new ethics. He made himself appear like a hero from the great
Chinese tradition of warrior statesmen.
Soon, everything in Mao’s speeches and writings had a reference to an
earlier period in Chinese history. He recalled, for example, the great Emperor Ch’in, who had unified the country in the third century B.C. Ch’in
had burned the works of Confucius, consolidated and completed the building of the Great Wall, and given his name to China, Like Ch’in, Mao also
had brought the country together, and had sought bold reforms against an
oppressive past. Ch’in had traditionally been seen as a violent dictator
whose reign was short; the brilliance of Mao’s strategy was to turn this
around, simultaneously reinterpreting Ch’in, justifying his rule in the eyes
of present-day Chinese, and using him to justify the violence of the new
order that Mao himself was creating.
After the failed Cultural Revolution of the late 1960s, a
power struggle
LAW 45 395
396
‘
LAW 45
emerged in the Communist Party in which Mao’s main foe was Lin Piao,
once a close friend of his. To make clear to the masses the difference between his philosophy and Lin’s, Mao once again exploited the past: He
cast his opponent as representing Confucius, a. philosopher Lin in fact
would constantly quote. And Confucius signified the conservatism of the
past. Mao associated himself, on the other hand, with the ancient philosophical movement known as Legalism, exemplified by the writings of
Han—fei~tzu. The Legalists disdained Confucian ethics; they believed in the
need for violence to create a new order. They worshiped power. To give
himself weight in the struggle, Mao unleashed a nationwide propaganda
campaign against Confucius, using the issues of Confucianism versus Legalism to whip the young into a kind of frenzied revolt against the older
generation. This grand context enveloped a. rather banal power struggle,
and Mao once again won over the masses and triumphed over his enemies.
Interpretation
No people had a more profound attachment to the past than the Chinese.
In the face of this enormous obstacle to reform, Mada strategy was simple:
Instead of struggling against the past he turned it to his advantage, associ~
ating his radical Communists with the romantic figures of Chinese history.
Weaving the story of the War of the Three Kingdoms into the struggle between the United States, the Soviet Union, and China, be cast himself as
Chuko Liang. As the emperors had, he welcomed the cultlike adoration of
the masses, understanding that the Chinese could not function without
some kind of father figure to admire. And after he made a terrible blunder
with the Great Leap Forward, trying to force modernization on the country
and failing miserably, he never repeated his mistake: From then on, radical
change had to be cloaked in the comfortable clothes of the past.
The lesson is simple: The past is powerful. What has happened before
seems greater; habit and history give any act weight. Use this to your advantage. When you destroy the fa.milia.r you create a void or vacuum; peo
ple fear the chaos that will flood in to fill it. You must avoid stirring up such
fears at all cost. Borrow the weight and legitimacy from the past, however
remote, to create a comforting and familiar presence. This will give your
actions romantic associations, add to your presence, and cloak the nature
of the changes you are attempting.
It must be considered that there is nothing more difficult to carry out,
no?‘ more doubtful ofsmcers, run more dangerous to handle,
than to initiate a new order ofthings.
Niccolo ;’\/iachiavelli, I~f69«I527
KEYS TO POWER
Human psychology contains many dualities, one of them being that even
while people understand the need for change, knowing how important it is
for institutions and individuals to be occasionally renewed, they are also ir-
ritated and upset by changes that affect them personally. They know that
change is necessary, and that novelty provides relief from boredom, but
deep inside they cling to the past. Change in the abstract, or superficial
change, they desire, but a change that upsets core habits and routines is
deeply disturbing to them.
No revolution has gone without a powerful later reaction against it, for
in the long run the void it creates proves too unsettling to the human animal, who unconsciously associates such voids with death and chaos. The
opportunity for change and renewal seduces people to the side of the revo~
lution, but once their enthusiasm fades, which it will, they are left with a
certain emptiness. Yearning for the past, they create an opening for it to
creep back in.
For Machiavelli, the prophet who preaches and brings change can
only survive by taking up arms: When the masses inevitably yearn for the
past, he must be ready to use force. But the armed prophet. cannot last long
unless he quickly creates a new set of values and rituals to replace the old
ones, and to soothe the anxieties of those who dread change. It is far easier,
and less bloody, to play a kind of con game. Preach change as much as you
like, and even enact your reforms, but give them the comforting appearance of older events and traditions.
Reigning from A.D. 8 to AD. 23, the Chinese emperor Wang Mung
emerged from a period of great historical turbulence in which the people
yearned for order, an order represented for them by Confucius. Some two
hundred years earlier, however, Emperor Ch’in had ordered the writings
of Confucius burned. A few years later, word had spread that certain texts
had miraculously survived, hidden under the scholar’s house. These texts
may not have been genuine, but they gave Wang his opportunity: He first
confiscated them, then had his scribes insert passages into them that
seemed to support the changes he had been imposing on the country.
When he released the texts, it seemed that Confucius sanctioned Wang’s
reforms, and the people felt comforted and accepted them more easily.
Understand: The fact that the past is dead and buried gives you the
freedom to reinterpret it. To support your cause, tinker with the facts. The
past is a text in which you can safely insert your own lines.
A simple gesture like using an old title, or keeping the same number
for a
group, will tie you to the past and support you with the authority of
history. As Machiavelli himself observed, the Romans used this device
when they transformed their monarchy into a
republic. They may have in
stalled two consuls in place of the king, but since the king had been served
by twelve lictors, they retained the same number to serve under the consuls. The king had personally performed an annual sacrifice, in 9. great
spectacle that stirred the public; the republic retained this practice, only
transferring it to a special “chief of the ceremony, whom they called the
King of the sacrifice.” These and similar gestures satisfied the people and
kept them from clamoring for the monarchy’s return.
Another strategy to disguise change is to make a loud and public dis~
play of support for the values of the past. Seem to be a zealot for tradition
LAW 45 397
398 LAW 45
and few will notice how unconventional you really are. Renaissance Florence had a centuries—old republic, and was suspicious of anyone who
floated its traditions. Cosimo de’ Medici made a Show of enthusiastic sup
port for the republic, while in reality he worked to bring the city under the
control of his wealthy family. In form, the Medicis retained the appearance
of a
republic; in substance, they rendered it powerless. They quietly en~
acted a radical change, while appearing to safeguard tradition.
Science claims a search for truth that would seem to protect it from
conservatism and the irrationality of habit: It is a culture of innovation. Yet
when Charles Darwin published his ideas of evolution, he faced fiercer ope
position from his fellow scientists than from religious authorities. His theories challenged too many fixed ideas. Jonas Salk ran into the same wall
with his radical innovations in immunology, as did Max Planck with his
revolutionizing of physics. Planck later wrote of the scientific opposition he
faced, “A new scientific truth does not triumph by convincing its opponents
and making them see the light. but rather because its opponents eventually
die, and a new generation grows up that is familiar with it.”
The answer to this innate conservatism is to play the courtier’s game.
Galileo did this at the beginning of his scientific career; he laxer became
more confrontational, and paid for it So pay lip service to tradition. Idem»
tify the elements in your revolution that can be made to seem to build on
the past. Say the right things, make a show of conformity, and meanwhile
let your theories do their radical work. Play with appearances and respect
past protocol. This is true in every arenae-science being no exception.
Finally, powerful people pay attention to the zeitgeist Iftheir reform is
too far ahead of its time, few will understand it, and it will stir up anxiety
and be hopelessly misinterpreted. The changes you make must seem less
innovative than they are. England did eventually become a Protestant na~
tion, as Cromwell wished, but it took over a century of gradual evolution.
Watch the zeitgeist. If you work in a tumultuous time, there is power to
be gained by preaching a return to the past, to comfort, tradition, and ritual. During a period of stagnation, on the other hand, play the card of reform and revo1ution—but beware of what you stir up. Those who finish a
revolution are rarely those who start it. You will not succeed at this dangerous game unless you are willing to forestall the inevitable reaction against it
by playing with appearances and building on the past.
Authority: He who desires or attempts to reform the government of a
stale, and wishes to have it accepted, must at least retain the semblance of
the old forms; so that it may seem to the people that there has been no
change in the institutions, even though in fact they are entirely different
from the old ones. For the great majority of mankind are satisfied with appearances, as though they were realities. (Niccolo Machiavelli, 1469-1527)
Image: The Cat.
Creature of habit, it loves the
warmth of the familiar. Upset its
routines, disrupt its space, and it will
grow unmanageable and psychotic.
Placate it by supporting its rituals. If
change is necessary, deceive the cat by
keeping the smell of the past alive;
place objects familiar to it in
strategic locations.
REVERSAL
The past is a
corpse to be used as you see fit. If what happened in the recent past was painful and harsh. it is se1f—destructive to associate yourself
with it. When Napoleon came to power, the French Revolution was fresh
in everyone’s minds. If the court that he established had borne any resemblance to the lavish court of Louis XVI and Marie-Antoinette, his courtiers
would have spent all their time worrying about their own necks. Instead,
Napoleon established a court remarkable for its sobriety and lack of ostentation. It was the court of a man who valued work and military virtues. This
new form seemed appropriate and reassuring.
In other words, pay attention to the times. But understand: If you
make a bold change from the past, you must avoid at all costs the appearance of a void or vacuum, or you will create terror. Even an ugly recent history will seem preferable to an empty space. Fill that space immediately
with new rituals and forms. Soothing and growing familiar, these will secure
your position among the masses.
Finally, the arts, fashion, and technology would seem to be areas in
which power would come from creating a radical rupture with the past and
appearing cutting edge. Indeed, such a strategy can bring great power, but
it has many dangers. It is inevitable that your innovations will be outdone
by someone else. You have little control—-someone younger and fresher
moves in a sudden new direction, making your bold innovation of yester~
day seem tiresome and tame today. You are forever playing catch-up; your
power is tenuous and short-lived. You want a
power built on something
more solid. Using the past, tinkering with tradition, playing with convention to subvert it will give your creations something more than a momentary appeal. Periods of dizzying change disguise the fact that a yearning for
the past will inevitably creep back in. In the end, using the past for your
own purposes will bring you more power than trying to cut it out comp1etely—-a. futile and self-destructive endeavor.
LAW 45 1 399
46
NEVER APPEAR
TOO PERFECT
JUDGMENT
Appearing better than others is always dangerous, but
must dangerous 0,’ all is to apglear to have no faults or
weaknesses. Em/y creates silent enemies. It is smart to accasionally display defects, and admit to hmmless vices,
in wder to deflect envy and appear more human and approachable. Only gods and the dead can seem perfect
with impunity.
400
l
TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW
Joe Orton met Kenneth Halliwell at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Arts,
London, in 1953, where both had enrolled as acting students. They soon
became lovers and moved in together. Halliwell, twenty—five at the time,
was seven years older than Orton, and seemed the more confident of the
two; but neither had much talent as actors, and after graduating, having set~
tied down together in a dank London apartment, they decided to give up
acting and collaborate as writers instead. Halliwell’s inheritance was
enough to keep them from having to find work for a few years, and in the
beginning, he was also the driving force behind the stories and novels they
wrote; he would dictate to Orton, who would type the manuscripts, occa~
sionally interjecting his own lines and ideas. Their first efforts attracted
some interest from literary agents, but it sputtered. The promise they had
shown was leading nowhere.
Eventually the inheritance money ran out, and the pair had to look for
work. Their collaborations were less enthusiastic and less frequent. The fu~
ture looked bleak.
In 1957 Orton began to write on his own, but it wasn’t until five years
later, when the lovers were jailed for six months for defacing dozens of library books, that he began to find his voice (perhaps not by chance: This
was the first time he and Halliwell had been separated in nine years). He
came out of prison determined to express his contempt for English society
in the form of theatrical farces. He and Halliwell moved back in together,
but now the roles were reversed: Orton did the writing while Halliwell put
in comments and ideas.
In 1964 joe Orton completed his first full-length play, Entertaining Mr.
Sloane. The play made it to London’s West End, where it received brilliant
reviews: A great new writer had emerged from nowhere. Now success followed siccess, at a dizzying pace. In 1966 Orton had a hit with his play
Loot, and his popularity soared. Soon commissions came in from all sides,
including from the Beatles, who paid Orton handsomely to write them a
film script
Everything was pointing upwards, everything except Orton’s relation»
ship with Kenneth Halliwell. The pair still lived together, but as Orton
grew successful, Halliwell began to deteriorate. Watching his lover become
the center of attention, he suffered the humiliation of becoming a kind of
personal assistant to the playwright, his role in what had once been a collaboration growing smaller and smaller. In the l950s he had supported
Orton with his inheritance; now Orton supported him. At a party or
among friends, people would naturally gravitate towards Orton-—he was
charming, and his mood was almost always buoyant Unlike the handsome
Orton, Halliwell was bald and awkward; his defensiveness made people
want to avoid him.
With Orton’s success the couple‘s problems only worsened. Halliwell’s
moods made their life together impossible. Orton claimed to want to leave
him, and had numerous affairs, but would always end up returning to his
‘xiii-:m1miu. t)r“ml—;
(§RHliil\' MAN /\\I) THIC
l'I,VVI(JliS M/\l\
A greedy man and an
en viuur [mm met a
king. The king said to
them. “One (Ifyou nmy
ask mmetlxing of me
and I will give It :1)
him, proviriewl I give
twice as much to the
other." The envious
person did not want to
ask first for he Wm:
envious of his campam
ion who would receive
Iwzrrt as much, and Ike
greedy man did not
want 10 ask first since
he wanted everytlzing
that was to be had.
Finally the greedy one
Llresred the envious one
lo be the_lirs‘I to make
the request. 30 the envious person asked the
king to pluck out one
oflris eyes.
JEWISH PARABLIS.
rm“. SEVFN l)EADl‘r' 53525,
SOLOMON SCKIIMMEL,
1992
An admtrer who feels
that he czmrzot be
lltlppy by surrendering
hitrzself
elects to
btrconzc envious ofthat
wlzicli he uciznirm. So
he spellks tinuilier
languagewilze (long
which he really admire:
is called a stupid.
insipizl and qm>r:r.rr:ri
ofilzing. Admimrion is
happy .s‘elf-Surrender;
envy is unhappy malfass:-rrian.
Sdizeu K1euiu~;uAAiw.
l 81 3-1 855
LAW 45
'
401
It takes great talent and
skill to conceal omes
lalmt and skill.
LA R()(‘l'|l.]“()l.'(TAULD.
16 1 3- l 680
|‘.\\\ 'I'l)|(\lL\ IS
.\(‘.I..t\l N05
The g0ll£l1’S.\‘ Mint'rva
made,’ her way to the
house o/Eiivy, (1 house
filthy with dark and
noisomc slime. It is
Itidrlzm away in the
depths of the valleys.
whrrr: the sun new/rr
pertetratex, where no
wind blows’ tltrottglz; tl
gloomy dwellirtt:.
permeated by numltihg
chill, evt>r_Iirele.r.s: ever
sltmtulad in thick (lurkntavr. When Minerva
rcaclzrd this spot she
Stopped in from oflhc
lmusc . . . and .\'trm:k
the doors with the tip
nfhrr Spear’, and at the
blow they //ew open
and rcvralwl Envy
within, Imsy at or /m-al
of.rrtakr".s fl(‘.\'ll, tlzo
fowl on which she
nourished her wickc A
ness. At the sight,
Minerva turned hcr
eyes away. But the
other rnxe ltteavily from
the ground, leaving the
lialf-eaten mrpsm, am]
(ante out with dragging
.rtep.s: When she saw the
gotltlcsx in all the l7l'llliance of hm’ beauty, m
lzer_/Iasltiltg armor, rite
groarwd. . . .
Envy ir face was sickly
pale, her whole hotly
lean and waster}, and
402 g
LAW 46
old friend and lover. He tried to help Halliwell launch a career as an artist,
even arranging for a gallery to show his work, but the show was a
flop, and
this only heightened Halliwell’s sense of inferiority. In May of 1967, the
pair went on a briefholiday together in Tangier, Morocco. During the trip,
Orton wrote in his diary, “We sat milking of how happy we felt. And how it
couldn’t, surely, last. We’d have to pay for it. Or we’d be struck down from
afar by disaster because we were, perhaps, too happy. To be young, goodlooking, healthy, famous, comparatively rich and happy is surely going
against nature.”
Halliwell outwardly seemed as happy as Orton. Inwardly, though, he
was seething. And two months later, in the early morning of August 10,
1967, just days after helping Orton put the finishing touches to the wicked
fa» ce What the Butler Saw (undoubtedly his masterpiece), Kenneth Halliwell
bludgeoned joe Orton to death with repeated blows of a hammer to the
head. He then took twenty—0ne sleeping pills and died himself, leaving behind a note that read, “If you read Orton’s diary all will be explained.”
Interpretation
Kenneth Halliwell had tried to cast his deterioration as mental illness, but
what joe Orton’s diaries revealed to him was the truth: It was envy, pure
and simple, that lay at the heart of his sickness. The diaries, which Halliwell read on the sly, recounted the couple’s days as equals and their struggle for recognition. After Orton found success, the diaries began to
describe Halliwell’s brooding, his rude comments at parties, his growing
sense of inferiority. All of this Orton narrated with a distance that bordered
on contempt.
The diaries made clear Halliwe1l’s bitterness over Orton’s success.
Eventually the only thing that would have satisfied him would have been
for Orton to have a failure of his own, an unsuccessful play perhaps, so that
they could have commiserated in their failure, as they had done years be
fore. When the opposite happened—as Orton grew only more successful
and popular—Halliwell did the only thing that would make them equals
again: He made them equals in death. With Orton’s murder, he became almost as famous as his friend——posthumously.
Joe Orton only partly understood his l0ver’s deterioration. His attempt
to help Halliwell launch a career in art registered for what it was: charity
and guilt Orton basically had two possible solutions to the problem. He
could have downplayed his own success, displaying some faults, deflecting
I-Ialliwell’s envy; or, once he realized the nature of the problem, he could
have fled as if Halliwell were a viper, as in fact he was—a viper of envy.
Once envy eats away at someone, everything you do only makes it grow,
and day by day it festers inside him. Eventually he will attack.
Only a minority can succeed at the game of life, and that minority inevitably arouses the envy of those around them. Once success happens
your way, however, the people to fear the most are those in your own ctr»
cle, the friends and acquaintances you have left behind. Feelings of inferi-
ority gnaw at them; the thought of your success only heightens their feel—
ings of stagnation. Envy, which the philosopher Kierkegaard calls “onhappy admiration,” takes hold. You may not see it but you will feel it
someday—unless, that is, you learn strategies of deflection, little sacrifices
to the gods of success. Either dampen your brilliance occasionally, pur~
posefully revealing a defect, weakness, or anxiety, or attributing your suc~
cess to luck; or simply find yourself new friends. Never underestimate the
power of envy.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
The merchant class and the craft guilds to which medieval Florence owed
its prosperity had created a
republic that protected them from oppression
by the nobility. Since high office could only be held for a few months, no
one could gain lasting dominance, and although this meant that the politi
cal factions struggled constantly for control, the system kept out tyrants
and petty dictators. The Medici family lived for several centuries under this
system without making much of a mark. They had modest origins as
apothecaries, and were typical middle-class citizens. Not until the late fourteenth century, when Giovanni de’ Medici made a modest fortune in bank
ing, did they emerge as a force to be reckoned with.
Upon Giova.nni’s death, his son Cosimo took over the family business,
and quickly demonstrated his talent for it. The business prospered under
his control and the Medicis emerged as one of the preeminent banking
families of Europe. But they had a rival in Florence: Despite the city’s re—
puhlican system, one family, the Albizzis, had managed over the years to
monopolize control of the government, forging alliances that allowed them
to constantly fill important offices with their own men. Cosimo did not
light this, and in fact gave the Albizzis his tacit support. At the same time,
while the Albizzis were beginning to flaunt their power, Cosimo made a
point of staying in the background.
Eventually, however, the Medici wealth could not be ignored, and in
1433, feeling threatened by the family, the Albizzis used their government
muscle to have Cosimo arrested on charges of conspiring to overthrow the
republic. Some in the Alhizzi faction wanted Cosimo executed, others
feared this would spark a civil war. In the end they exiled him from Florence. Cosimo did not fight the sentence; he left quietly. Sometimes, he
knew, it is wiser to bide one’s time and keep a low profile.
Over the next year, the Alhizzis began to stir up fears that they were
setting up a dictatorship. Meanwhile, Cosimo, using his wealth to advantage, continued to exert influence on Florentine affairs, even from exile. A
civil war broke out in the city, and in September of 1434 the Albizzis were
toppled from power and sent into exile. Cosimo immediately returned to
Florence, his position restored. But he saw that he now faced a delicate sit»
uation: If he seemed ambitious, as the Albizzis had, he would stir up opposition and envy that would ultimately threaten his business. If he stayed on
she s¢/Ilium’) horribly;
her 7("l'.1/I went IlL<c'olvied and tlemyell. her
poi.mmm.r lzreuir of 21
g/‘vanish hue, and her
tongue dripped venom.
Only the sight of
suffering could bring a
smile to her 1025‘. Sh!)
never knew the comfort
afslz-e , but was kept
conslamly awake by
care and anxiety.
looked with rlisrzxay on
men's good forlsme.
um! grew thin at the
siglzl. Gnawirig at
others, and lining
grmwezl, she was herself
her own torment.
Mmrrvu, in spire 0_/‘her
lr)(II/ring, yet addressezl
her briefly: “Instill yrmr
pr.-i,s'r1rz into one of
Cecra/2 ’s daughrerxfi
her name is /lglaums.
’l'hi.r is what I
require
of you.
"
Without
armllier word she
puxltrtd agaiz/Lt: the
ground with her spear.
Is}? the earrh, and
soared upwards.
From the comer’ ofhcr
eye the ozher watched
the goddess our of
Sight. muttering and
angry that Minerva ‘X
plan should be .\'llC('€.8‘Sful. Then she took her
.s'mff all encirclerl with
thorny briam‘. wrapped
herselfin dark clouds,
and set forth. Wherever
she went she tmmplezl
down llieflower}r_IieI1ls,
withered up the grant,
xrtrrerl the Ireetzips, mm‘
with hm bmzth rainied
the pe¢)plr.'.i', their cities‘
and their homes. mm‘!
a! length she came to
Athens‘, the home of Wll
and wealth, peaceful
and proxpemus. She
could scarcely refrain
from weeping when she
Saw no cause for tears.
LAW 45 403
Than mm-ing the
chamber of Cecmp Ix
daughtvr. size carrier]
mu Mimxrva '3‘ cmlers.
Size touched the girl’:
br¢'u.\’l WII/I a Immt’
dipped in Hill”! 4:, filled
l1z»'rh¢'aI( will: spiky
rlmrm. (mil breallzirig
in it black cum’ cw"!
poiwit 1li.s’per.se(! it
through her very bones.
instilling the venom
deep in her heart. Tim!
the reason for her
a‘:sIres.s' might not be
for to trek, she .\(’I
before Aglazzrm’ cyres r:
vi\'i()rl ofhcr mtcr. of
lh41l‘.\‘l.s r'.3'forIumt1e
marriage /with the god
Merczcry/, and ofthe
god in all his hour!»
.SL)I!tL’II£‘.\‘.S‘,' um} size
c.tug,i;erule(1 the glory
of H all.
5}: Aglxzumx was
sormrnzmt by such
t!14mgIzt.r, and the jar!»
our anger site
mnurcaled am into her
heart. Day and night
.vI1r:xighctl, lmceaxingly
wretched. and in her
utter nulrerjv wasteii
away in it slow tlflrllllt’.
as when ice is mrzlturl
by !Iu'_/1'tfuI.u,m.
T}1:,'jire that was
iciirrlled within her at
the thought ofiwr
xi.m'r'.r luck and good
fanume was like the
burning of weediwhich do not bllfsf into
flames, but are rwne the
less crmxunml by
xmoldermgfirz-,.
METAMORP|l(JSl‘S.
Ovio,43 n.c:—c. .«..n, 18
404 LAW 45
the sidelines, on the other hand, he would leave an opening for another
faction to rise up as the Albizzis had, and to punish the Medicis for their
success.
Cosimo solved the problem in two ways: He secretly used his wealth
to buy influence among key citizens, and he placed his own allies, all cleverly enlisted from the middle classes to disguise their allegiance to him, in
top government positions. Those who complained of his growing political
clout were taxed into submission, or their properties were bought out from
under them by Cosimo’s banker allies. The republic survived in name
only. Cosimo held the strings.
While he worked behind the scenes to gain control, however, publicly
Cosimo presented another picture. When he walked through the streets of
Florence, he dressed modestly, was attended by no more than one servant, and bowed deferentially to magistrates and elder citizens. He rode a
mule instead of a horse. He never spoke out on matters of public import,
even though he controlled Florence’s foreign affairs for over thirty years.
He gave money to charities and maintained his ties to Florence’s merchant
class. He financed all ldnds of public buildings that fed the Florentines’
pride in their city. When he built a palace for himself and his family in
nearby Fiesole, he turned down the ornate designs that Brunelleschi
had drawn up for him and instead chose a modest structure designed by
Michelozzo, a man of humble Florentine origins. The palace was a symbol
of Cosimo’s strategy—all simplicity on the outside, all elegance and opu~
lence within.
Cosimo finally died in 1464, after ruling for years. The citizens
of Florence wanted to build him a great tomb, and to celebrate his memory
with elaborate funeral ceremonies, but on his deathbed he had asked to be
buried without “any pomp or demonstration.” Some sixty years later,
Machiavelli hailed Cosimo as the wisest of all princes, “for he knew how
extraordinary things that are seen and appear every hour make men much
more envied than those that are done in deed and are covered over with
decency.”
Interpretation
A close friend of Cosimo’s, the bookseller Vespasiano da Bisticci, once
wrote of him, “And whenever he wished to achieve something, he saw to it,
in order to escape envy as much as possible, that the initiative appeared to
come from others, and not from h.1'.m.” One of Cosirno’s favorite expressions was, “Envy is a weed that should not be watered.” Understanding the
power envy has in a democratic environment, Cosimo avoided the appearance of greatness. This does not mean that greatness should be suffocated,
or that only the mediocre should survive; only that a game of appearances
must be played. The insidious envy of the masses can actually be deflected
quite easily: Appear as one of them in style and values. Make alliances with
those below you, and elevate them to positions of power to secure their
support in times of need. Never flaunt your wealth, and carefully conceal
the degree to which it has bought influence. Make a display of deferring to
others, as if they were more powerful than you. Cosimo de’ Medici perfected this game; he was a consummate con artist of appearances. No one
could gauge the extent of his power———his modest exterior hid the truth.
Never be so foolish as to believe that you are stirring up admiration by
flaunting the qualities that raise you above others. By making others aware
of their inferior position, you are only stirring up “unhappy admiration,” or
envy, which will gnaw away at them until they undermine you in ways you
cannot foresee. The fool dares the gods of envy by flaunting his victories.
The master of power understands that the appearance of superiority over
others is inconsequential next to the reality of it.
Ofzzli the disorders ofthe soul, envy is the only one no one confesses to.
1’lul(lVt7lt. 1'. AJ). 46-120
KEYS TO POWER
The human animal has a hard time dealing with feelings of inferiority. In
the ‘face of superior skill, talent, or power, we are often disturbed and ill at
ease; this is because most of us have an inflated sense of ourselves, and
when we meet people who surpass us they make it clear to us that we are in
fact mediocre, or at least not as brilliant as we had thought. This discur~
bance in our self-image cannot last long without stirring up ugly emotions.
At first we feel envy: If only we had the quality or skill of the superior per
son, we would be happy. But envy brings us neither comfort not any closer
to equality. Nor can we admit to feeling it, for it is frowned upon socially“
to show envy is to admit to feeling inferior. To close friends, we may confess our secret unrealized desires, but we will never confess to feeling envy.
So it goes underground. We disguise it in many ways, like finding grounds
to criticize the person who makes us feel it: He may be smarter than I am,
we say, but he has no morals or conscience. Or he may have more power,
but that’s because he cheats. If we do not slander him, perhaps we praise
him excessiveIy——-another of envy’s disguises.
There are several strategies for dealing with the insidious, destructive
emotion of envy. First, accept the fact that there will be people who will
surpass you in some way, and also the fact that you may envy them. But
make that feeling a way of pushing yourself to equal or surpass them someday. let envy turn inward and it poisons the soul; expel it outward and it
can move you to greater heights.
Second, understand that as you gain power, those below you will feel
envious of you. They may not show it but it is inevitable. Do not naively accept the facade they show you———read between the lines of their criticisms,
their little sarcastic remarks, the signs of backstabbing, the excessive praise
that is preparing you for a fall, the resentful look in the eye. Half the problem with envy comes when we do not recognize it until it is too late.
Finally, expect that when people envy you they will work against you
The envious ltirles us
mmfully as rlw .wr'rvr,
lustful slnncr and
beuonws the endless
inventor of mi ks mid
rrraragemr to hide and
nm.vkl1imszaIf.' Thus he
is able to prczeml 10
ignore the superiority
of ollwrs whiclz sum up
his heart, as ifhc did
not see them, nor llfldl
(hem, nor were aware
ofzhcm, I10?/lull ever
heard nfllmm. Ila it a
master xintularar. On
the ulller hand he (rim;
with all his power to
cronmyc and thin
prevent any form of
sirperiorziy from
u;/nearing in any
,vii1mn'm1.And ifthey (In. he
costs on zln,-m obscurity. Ilypc-rcrilicisni.
surcaxrn and calumuy
like (hr mad that spits
poison from its hole.
On the olher lumd he
will raise erullrtrsly
imwgnifiziunt men.
mediocre pmplra am!
even me inkrior in /he
smrze lype uf arc-(r‘vitie.s.
A rm1 U R
S(‘H()PFNl[AL'FR.
l 7884 800
For not many nmz, [he
prover!) mys, can love a
frieml who forltmt’
prr7,rpws wirlu>utfe:eling envy; and ahour the
mvious brain. cold
poison dings and
(l0llbleSl1l[ll1L‘ pain life
bnngx him. His own
woumlingi‘ he must
nurse, and feels
anrltlwrir glurlnrss
like :1 curse.
AHsr.‘im.IIs.
c. 525456 urn
LAW 46 405
l().sIu|’I>| \'\[) ||l.\‘ (‘.()\I‘
Now Israel loved
Joseph nmre than all
his children. brrattse he
was the $07! of his old
age; and he made him it
com‘ ofnumy colors. . . .
Ana’ his bro!/1er.v
envied him. . . . And
when they saw him afar
off they mnxpirm’
against him to slay
him. And now they said
to one atzotlwr.
“Behold. this drtemmrr
comclh. Come now
therefore, and let its
slay him. and rat! him
iItt17 xotme pit. and Hit’
shall say. mmr: cw!
boast /talh dnrottrml
him,‘ and we‘ shall see
who! WI” become ofhts
dreunts: "
OLD ‘H-_S[‘AMF.\’I,
(§hNI:SlS 37:3—20
TIN. 'I‘Rt\I.‘I”.lH
HI‘ |'lI|C 'lI)\lH
[When Pope ./ulius first
saw Mtdteltirtgelo it
ilesig/1 ‘Ior his tomb] it
[7fe(l.\'(€(l him so much
that ht’ (H ()!l(,'(’ sent him
(0 Carrara I0 quarry
the nemr.rary marhlfls.
t‘n.rtrm:tt'ng Alamamm
Salviati, 0fFlr7rsIt(‘£', to
pay him a thnuwnrt
duCt11S' for this pttrpou-.
Mich:-,[angrelu staywl in
these mountains more
than eight months with
two worlmten am! his
horse, and wtlhout any
other provi.\‘i()rt except
food. . . . Enough
marbles quarried and
chasm. he took them to
the sea-coast, and left
406 LAW 46
insidiously. They will put obstacles in your path that you will not foresee,
or that you cannot trace to their source. It is hard to defend yourself against
this kind of attack. And by the time you realize that envy is at the root of a
person’s feelings about you, it is often too late: Your excuses, your false humility, your defensive actions, only exacerbate the problem. Since it is far
easier to avoid creating envy in the first place than to get rid of it once it is
there, you should strategize to forestall it before it grows. It is often your
own actions that stir up envy, your own unawareness. By becoming conscious ofthose actions and qualities that create envy, you can take the teeth
out of it before it nibbles you to death.
Kierkegaard believed that there are types of people who create envy,
and are as guilty when it arises as those who feel it. The most obvious type
we all know: The moment something good happens to them, whether by
luck or design, they crow about it. In fact they get pleasure out of making
people feel inferior. This type is obvious and beyond hope. There are oth
ers, however, who stir up envy in more subtle and unconscious ways, and
are partly to blame for their troubles. Envy is often a problem, for example, for people with great natural talent.
Sir Walter Raleigh was one of the most brilliant men at the court of
Queen Elizabeth of England. He had skills as a scientist, wrote poetry still
recognized as among the most beautiful writing of the time, was a
proven
leader of men, an enterprising entrepreneur, a great sea captain, and on
top of all this was a handsome, dashing courtier who charmed his way into
becoming one of the queen’s favorites. Wherever he went however, pea
ple blocked his path. Eventually he suffered a terrific fall from grace, leading even to prison and finally the executioner’s axe.
Raleigh could not understand the stubborn opposition he faced from
the other courtiers. He did not see that he had not only made no attempt to
disguise the degree of his skills and qualifies, he had imposed them on one
and all, making a show of his versatility, thinking it impressed people and
won him friends. In fact it made him silent enemies, people who felt inferior to him and did all they could to ruin him the moment he tripped up or
made the slightest mistake. In the end, the reason he was executed was
ueason, but envy will use any cover it finds to mask its destructiveness.
The envy elicited by Sir Walter Raleigh is the worst kind: It was inspired by his natural talent and grace, which he felt was best displayed in
its full flower. Money others can attain; power as well. But superior intelligence, good looks, cha.rm—these are qualities no one can acquire. The naturally perfect have to work the most to disguise their brilliance, displaying
a defect or two to deflect envy before it takes root. It is a common and
naive mistake to think you are charming people with your natural talents
when in fact they are coming to hate you.
A great danger in the realm ofpower is the sudden improvement in for
tune——an unexpected promotion, a victory or success that seems to come
out of nowhere. This is sure to stir up envy among your former peers.
When Archbishop de Retz was promoted to the rank of cardinal, in
1651, he knew full well that many of his former colleagues envied him.
Understanding the foolishness of alienating those below him, de Retz did
everything he could to downplay his merit and emphasize the role of luck
in his success. To put people at ease, he acted humbly and deferentially, as if
nothing had changed. (In reality, of course, he now had much more power
than before.) He wrote that these wise policies “produced a good effect, by
lessening the envy which was conceived against me, which is the greatest of
all secrets.” Follow de Retz’s example. Subtly emphasize how lucky you
have been, to make your happiness seem more attainable to other people,
and the need for envy less acute. But be careful not to affect a false modesty
that people can easily see through. This will only make them more envious.
The act has to be good; your humility, and your openness to those you have
left behind, have to seem genuine. Any hint of insincerity will only make
your new status more oppressive. Remember: Despite your elevated posi»
tion, it will do you no good to alienate your former peers. Power requires a
wide and solid support base, which envy can silently destroy.
Political power of any kind creates envy, and one of the best ways to
deflect it before it takes root is to seem unambitious. When Ivan the Terrible died, Boris Godunov knew he was the only one on the scene who could
lead Russia. But if he sought the position eagerly, he would stir up envy
and suspicion among the boyars, so he refused the crown, not once but
several times. He made people insist that he take the throne. George Washington used the same strategy to great effect, first in refusing to keep the position of Commander in Chief of the American army, second in resisting
the presidency. In both cases he made himself more popular than ever.
People cannot envy the power that they themselves have given a
person
who does not seem to desire it.
According to the Elizabethan statesman and writer Sir Francis Bacon,
the wisest policy of the powerful is to create a kind of pity for themselves,
as if their responsibilities were a burden and a sacrifice. How can one envy
a man who has taken on a heavy load for the public interest? Disguise your
power as a. kind of self—sacrifice rather than a source of happiness and you
make it seem less enviable. Emphasize your troubles and you turn a
potential danger (envy) into a source of moral support (pity). A similar ploy is to
hint that your good fortune will benefit those around you. To do this you
may need to open your purse strings, like Cimon, a wealthy general in ancient Athens who gave lavishly in all kinds of ways to prevent people from
resenting the influence he had bought in Athenian politics. He paid a high
price to cleflect their envy, but in the end it saved him from ostracism and
banishment from the city.
The painter J. M. W. Turner devised another way of giving to deflect
the envy of his fellow artists, which he recognized as his greatest obstacle to
his success. Noticing that his incomparable color skills made them afraid to
hang their paintings next to his in exhibitions, he realized that their fear
would turn to envy, and would eventually make it harder for him to find
galleries to show in. On occasion, then, Turner is known to have temporarily dampened the colors in his paintings with soot to earn him the goodwill
of his colleagues.
one afhis men to have
them ernbarkrd. He
himself retzwzod In
Rome.
.. . The Lguruitity of
marbles was iirnnrnse,
so rluu, spread over the
piazza. they were the
admiration ofull and a
joy to the pope. who
heaped 1'mmeu.s'ura!:Ie
flzvarr upon MiL'helzmgala; and when he
began to work upon
them again and again
wem to see him at his
house, and talked to
hm: abzzm‘ the tomb
and other (hing: as
with his own brother.
And in order that he
mighr more easily go (0
him, the pope ordered
I11!!! 11 drawbririge
should be thrown
arrnszr from the Corriclore to the rooms of
Michelangelo. by which
he might visit him in
private.
There many and
frequent fax.-ar.r were
the cause (as often is
the care at court) of
much envy, and, after
the envy, of e!z4l.'14r‘.\:\'
per,\'r'('mion, sizx(.'¢’
Brumame, the architect.
who was loved by the
pope, made him Change
his mind as lo the
monument by Ielling
him. as is‘ said by the
vulgar, Ihrrt it is
unlucky to build (mes
tomb in onciv lifetime,
and other rules, Fear us
well as er: vy slirnulaled
Bramanm f<:r1ize;u.:lg»
men! Ilf/Wit?/1t’[llI1[;'£’I0
hurl exposccl many of
his errors. . . . Now
imcuxzxc he had no
doubt char Michelangelo knew rlmrr: errors
ofhir, he always sought
to remove him from
R0011’, or. at leaxl. to
deprive him 0/‘the
LAW 46 407
favor ofzhe pope. and
ofthe glory and usefulHess /Imt he might have
(I('ql¢in’a' Ivy his inclustry. He succeeded‘ in the
matter 0f
the tomb.
There is no douh: that
ifMiclwlangelo had
been allowed to finish
it, acconl/‘rig to /xirfirst
design, having so large
a
field in which to show
his warm, no other
artisr, however Cele»
brated (be lvrald without envy) could have
wrartetl /rom hm: the
Mg]: place he would
have held
VITA m M1LtH1:I.A,N(;m.o,
/\s(‘,ANI() (‘ON mvl,
1553
But over anybody seriausly con_fe.\‘.s' Io envy?
Something there is in it
universally fell Io he
more shameful than
even felonimu‘ crime.
And rwl only does‘
evcryl>or1_y disuwn it,
but the In-(tar sort are
inc/inecl to irzcrredulity
when it is in earnest
impuaerl to an intelligent man. But .sim'e
(odgmrem is in the hour!
not the brain. no degree
afimellec! supplies a
guamnlee against it.
BILLY sumo,
HERMAN‘ MFLVII 1.1;‘,
18194891
408 LAW $6
To deflect envy, Graciein recommends that the powerful display a
weakness, at minor social indiscretion, a harmless vice. Give those who
envy you something to feed on, distracting them from your more important sins. Remember: It is the reality that matters. You may have to play
games with appearances, but in the end you will have what counts: true
power. In some Arab countries, a man will avoid arousing envy by doing
as Cosimo de Medici did by showing his wealth only on the inside of his
house. Apply this wisdom to your own character.
Beware of some ofenvy’s disguises. Excessive praise is an almost sure
sign that the person praising you envies you; they are either setting you up
for a. fall—-it will be impossible for you to live up to their prajse——or they
are sharpening their blades behind your back. At the same time, those who
are hypercrifical of you, or who slander you publicly, probably envy you
as well. Recognize their behavior as disguised envy and you keep out of
the trap of mutual mud-slinging, or of taking their criticisms to heart. Win
your revenge by ignoring their measly presence.
Do not try to help or do favors for those who envy you; they will think
you are condescending to them. joe Orton’s attempt to help Halliwell find
a gallery for his work only intensified his lover‘s feelings of inferiority and
envy. Once envy reveals itself for what it is, the only solution is often to
flee the presence of the enviers, leaving them to stew in a hell of their own
creation.
Finally, be aware that some emrimnments are more conducive to envy
than others. The effects of envy are more serious among colleagues and
peers, where there is a veneer of equality. Envy is also destructive in demo~
cratic environments where overt displays of power are looked down upon.
Be extrasensitive in such environments. The filmmaker Ingmar Bergman
was hounded by Swedish tax authorities because he stood out in a
county
where standing out from the crowd is frowned on. It is almost impossible
to avoid envy in such cases, and there is little you can do but accept it gm»
ciously and take none of it personally. As Thoreau once said, “Envy is the
tax which all distinction must pay.”
Image: A Garden of Weeds. You may not
feed them but they spread as you water
the garden. You may not see how, but
they take over, tall and ugly, preventing anything beautiful from
flourishing. Before it is too late,
do not water indiscrimis
nately. Destroy the weeds
of envy by giving them
nothing to feed on.
Authority: Upon occasion, reveal a harmless defect in your character. For the envious accuse the most perfect of sinning by having no
sins. They become an Argus, all eyes for finding fault with excellence—it is their only consolation. Do not let envy burst with its own
venom—affect some lapse in valor or intellect, so as to disarm it
beforehand. You thus wave your red cape before the Horns of Envy,
in order to save your immortality. (Baltasar Gracién, 1601-1658)
REVERSAL
The reason for being careful with the envious is that they are so indirect,
and will find innumerable ways to undermine you. But treading carefully
around them will often only make their envy worse. They sense that you
are being cautious, and it registers as yet another sign of your superiority.
That is why you must act before envy takes root.
Once envy is there, however, whether through your fault or not, it is
sometimes best to affect the opposite approach: Display the utmost disdain
for those who envy you. Instead of hiding your perfection, make it obvious. Make every new triumph an opportunity to make the envious squirm.
Your good fortune and power become their living hell. If you attain a position of unimpeachable power, their envy will have no effect on you, and
you will have the best revenge of all: They are trapped in envy while you
are free in your power.
This is how Michelangelo triumphed over the venomous architect
Bramante, who turned Pope Julius against Michela.ngelo’s design for his
tomb. Bramante envied Michelangelo’s godlike skills, and to this one triumph—the aborted tomb project—he thought to add another, by pushing
the pope to commission Michelangelo to paint the murals in the Sistine
Chapel. The project would take years, during which Michelangelo would
accomplish no more of his brilliant sculptures. Furthermore, Bramante
considered Michelangelo not nearly as skilled in painting as in sculpture.
The chapel would spoil his image as the perfect artist.
Michelangelo saw the trap and wanted to turn down the commission,
but he could not refuse the pope, so he accepted it without complaint.
Then, however, he used Bra.rnante’s envy to spur him to greater heights,
making the Sistine Chapel his most perfect work of all. Every time Bramante heard of it or saw it, he felt more oppressed by his own envy—the
sweetest and most lasting revenge you can exact on the envious.
Know how to triumph
over envy and malice.
Hrre (.'(}Vll£fVI‘L[)L
although prudent,
counls, indeed, for
little; mugnanimity is
better. A good word
cormerning one who
speaks evil ofyou
cannot be praised too
highly: there is no
revrtrige more heroic
than that brought
about by those merits
and ultaimnents which
frustrate and torment
the ctzviousz Every
stroke ofgood fortune
is (I further twist oflhe
rape round the neck of
rho ill-disposed and the
heaven o/‘the envied is
hell for the envious. To
convert your good
fortune [mo ;mi.w/n /or
your meniires is held to
he the nzrm sewrc
punislzrrwrlt you vim
iriflict on them. The
(envious man dim not
only once but as many
times as zhepersoli he
envies liver to hear the
mice ofpraisec the
etwnity oflhe [utters
jizme is the measure of
(he farrnerk punishment: my one is immortal in his glory. lite
latter in his misery. The
Irumper offume which
sounds immortulityfor
the om) heralds dmth
for the other. who is
semencetl to be choked
to death on his own
mv n
B.-\l,TASAl( (iRA<‘|A.~4.
l6()l—l658
LAW 46 409
410
LAW
47
DO NOT GO PAST THE
MARK YOU AIMED FOR;
IN VICTORY,
LEARN WHEN TO STOP
JUDGMENT
The moment of victmy is often the moment of greatest
peril. In the heat of victmy, armgance and ovenronfil
dense can push you past the gaalyou had aimedfar, and
by going wafar, you make more enemies than you defeat.
Do not allow success to go to your head. There is no sub»
stitutefor strategy and carefulplanning. Set a goal, and
when you reach it, stop.
TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW
In 559 B.C., a young man named Cyrus gathered an immense army from
the scattered tribes of Persia and marched against his grandfather Astyages,
king of the Medes. He defeated Astyages with ease, had himself crowned
king of Medea and Persia, and began to forge the Persian Empire. Victory
followed victory in quick succession. Cyrus defeated Croesus, ruler of
Lydia, then conquered the Ionian islands and other smaller kingdoms; he
marched on Babylon and crushed it. Now he was known as Cyrus the
Great, King of the World.
After capturing the riches ofBabylon, Cyrus set his sights on the east,
on the half-barbaric tribes of the Massagetai, a. vast realm on the Caspian
Sea. A fierce warrior race led by Queen Tomyris, the Massagetai lacked the
riches of Babylon, but Cyrus decided to attack them anyway, believing
himself superhuman and incapable of defeat. The Massagetai would fall
easily to his vast armies, making his empire immense.
In 529 B.C., then, Cyrus marched to the wide river Araxes, gateway to
the kingdom of the Massagetai. As he set up camp on the western bank, he
received a message from Queen Tomyris: “King of the Medes,” she told
him, “I advise you to abandon this enterprise, for you cannot know ifin the
end it will do you any good. Rule your own people, and try to bear the
sight of me ruling mine. But of course you will refuse my advice, as the last
thing you wish for is to live in peace.” Tomyris, confident of her army’s
strength and not wishing to delay the inevitable battle, offered to withdraw
the troops on her side of the river, allowing Cyrus to cross its waters safely
and fight her army on the eastern side, if that was his desire.
Cyrus agreed, but instead of engaging the enemy directly he decided
to play a trick. The Massagetai knew few luxuries. Once Cyrus had crossed
the river and made his camp on the eastern side, he set the table for an
elaborate banquet, full of meat, delicacies, and strong wine. Then he left
his weakest troops in the camp and withdrew the rest of the army to the
river. A large Massagetai detachment soon attacked the camp and killed all
of the Persian soldiers in a fierce battle. Then, overwhelmed by the fabu—
lous feast that had been left behind, they ate and drank to their hearts’ content Later, inevitably, they fell asleep. The Persian army returned to the
camp that night, killing many of the sleeping soldiers and capturing the
rest. Among the prisoners was their general, a
youth named Spargapises,
son of Qieen Tomyris.
When the queen learned what had happened, she sent a message to
Cyrus, chiding him for using tricks to defeat her army. “Now listen to me,”
she wrote, “and I will advise you for your own good: Give me back my son
and leave my country with your forces intact, and be content with your triumph over a third part of the Massagetai. If you refuse, I swear by the sun
our master to give you more blood than you can drink, for all your gluttony.
”
Cyrus scoffed at her: He would not release her son. He would crush
these barbarians.
The queen’s son, seeing he would not be released, could not stand the
Vllll‘. \ \l\(Il Ultllll 3
(AH KICRIZI,
'/W0 rrockerelx f()l([,’ll{
on a
rlunghwp. One
cuckcrcl war the
stronger: he
vunquirlzcd the other
and draw him from
the dungheap.
All the hem gathered
around the cockerel,
and began to laud him.
The cuzrkrtrel wanletl
his strength and glory
to be known in the maxi
wml. He flew (m (up of
the bum, flapper! his
wings. and crowed in a
land mine: “Look at
me, all of you. I am (1
Vi(‘I(N‘l()l1.\‘ cockcrcl.
Nu uther wcktzrel in
the world has such
ryrenglh. us I.
"
The cockcrel had not
finished, when an angle
killed him, seized him
in his claws, and
carried him to his mart.
XABI Ls,
Lt-,0 Tm srov,
1828 —l 9 l t)
LAW 47 411
l’II|‘ >l.t_)l I‘ \( Ii 4)!‘
l\{l)\‘i—|:\\\||\\|‘|U\J
In all your L.'F0.\'.Vr.mmimir1rm.s' . . . , mm‘:
impmmm n/all. let me
rr»/war Ihe mjtmcliun In
he ever on /he ulerl for
a good /7]Il(,’[’ In xnlp.
Nor/ting am he more
tmpnrlzim than to close
your e.rmmImn'(m will;
.1 mum,/wh. So many
Iuw_\'z'r.s' murder] in
(‘arc/ting u witrzers in 11
Serious crmrrzldictiori;
lmt, rm! saris/ierl with
this: go on asking qmI.\'—
(ions. and layer off
their e.t41rr1inaIiun until
the effect upon (he fury
of tlzrirfornmr arivmie
(age is lost u/Iugctlwr.
TH}: /nu‘ or (‘RossI.-.‘(»\MIN/\l'l()‘~£.
FRANCIS L, WI-1 LMAN.
l‘)l3
PHI‘, (H Ifllilth \t2l|l\tl
t1l5\|‘}l(r\|
We rmd of many
In.»mm‘e‘.\' of this kimi,
/‘ur the general who by
his valor Imx
(,‘()I1([ll6I‘erI u tlalvz for
/ziy rnuslw‘, and won
great glow for himself
by his victory over the
enemy, and has loaded
his soldiers with rich
Imnty, m’t[uirF.\' m?1'¢'\‘—
sarily with his own
wldicrs, as well us with
[/1038 nflhe L’Il(’IIl)' and
with the vulajnrrs ufllw
prirxng rohig/1 u
n77u—
mlirm. that his‘ very
wrtury may lmcurm»
distmveful, and u l‘lllIXAf
for apprc/misimz In his
[7I‘lIl(,‘t’. For as the
41.? LAW 47
humiliation, and so he killed himself. The news of her son’s death over»
whelmed Tomyris. She gathered all the forces that she could muster in her
kingdom, and whipping them into a vengeful frenzy, engaged Qrms’s
troops in a violent and bloody battle. Finally, the Massagetai prevailed. In
their anger they decimated the Persian army, killing Cyrus himself.
After the battle, Tomyris and her soldiers searched the battlefield for
Cyrus’s corpse. When she found it she cut olf his head and shoved it into a
wineskin full of human blood, crying out, “Though I have conquered you
and live, yet you have ruined me by treacherously taking my son. See
now--I fulfill my threat: You have your fill of blood.” After Cyrus’s death,
the Persian Empire quickly unraveled. One act of arrogance undid all of
Cyrus’s good work.
Interpretation
There is nothing more intoxicating than victory, and nothing more dangerous.
Cyrus had built his great empire on the ruins of a previous one. A hundred years earlier, the powerful Assyrian Empire had been totally de«
stroyed, its once splendid capital of Nineveh but ruins in the sand. The
Assyrians had suffered this fate because they had pushed too far, destroying one city-state after another until they lost sight of the purposes of their
victories, and also of the costs. They overextended themselves and made
many enemies who were finally able to band together and destroy them.
Cyrus ignored the lesson of Assyria. He paid no heed to the warnings
of oracles and advisers. He did not worry about offending a
queen. His
many victories had gone to his head, clouding his reason. Instead of consolidating his already vast empire, he pushed forward. Instead ofrecognizing each situation as different, he thought each new war would bring the
same result as the one before as long as he used the methods he knew:
ruthless force and cunning.
Understand: In the realm of power, you must be guided by reason. To
let a momentary thrill or an emotional victory influence or guide your
moves will prove fatal. When you attain success, step back. Be cautious.
When you gain victory, understand the part played by the particular circumstances of a situation, and never simply repeat the same actions again
and again. History is littered with the mins of victorious empires and the
corpses of leaders who could not learn to stop and consolidate their gains.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
No single person in history has occupied a more delicate and precarious
position than the kings mistress. She had no real or legitimate power base
to fall back on in times of trouble‘, she was surrounded by packs of envious
courtiers eagerly anticipating her fall from grace; and finally, since the
source of her power was usually her physical beauty, for most royal mistresses that fall was inevitable and unpleasant.
King Louis XV of France began to keep official mistresses in the early
days of his reign, each woman’s good fortune rarely lasting more than a
few years. But then came Madame de Pompadour, who, when she was a
middle-class child of nine named jeanne Poisson, had been told by a fortune~teller that she would someday be the king’s favorite. This seemed an
absurd dream, since the royal mistress almost always came from the aris~
tocracy. Jeanne nevertheless believed herself destined to seduce the king,
and doing so became her obsession. She applied herselfto the talents the
king’s favorite had to have-—-music, dancing, acting, horseback riding——-
and she excelled in every one of them. As a
young woman, she married a
man of the lower nobility, which gave her an entree to the best salons in
Paris. Word quickly spread of her beauty, talent, charm, and intelligence.
Jeanne Poisson became close friends with Voltaire, Montesquieu, and
other great minds of the time, but she never lost sight of the goal she had
set herself as a girl: to capture the heart of the king. Her husband had a
chateau in a forest where the king would often go hunting, and she began
to spend a lot of time there. Studying his movements like a hawk, she
would make sure he would “happen” to come upon her while she was out
walking in her most alluring dress, or riding in her splendid coach. The
king began to take note of her, making her gifts of the game he caught in
the hunt.
In 1744 Louis’s current mistress, the Duchesse de Chateauroux, died.
Jeanne went on the offensive. She placed herself everywhere he would be:
at masked balls at Versailles, at the opera, wherever their paths would
cross, and wherever she could display her many talents: dancing, singing,
riding, coquetry. The king finally succumbed to her charms, and in a ceremony at Versailles in September of 1745, this twenty—four—year~old daughter of a rniddleaclass banking agent was officially inaugurated as the king’s
mistress. She was given her own room in the palace, a room the king could
enter at any time via a hidden stairway and back door. And because some
of the courtiers were angry that he had chosen a woman of low origins, he
made her a marquise. From now on she would be known as Madame de
Pompadour.
The king was a man whom the slightest feeling of boredom would oppress out of proportion. Madame de Pompadour knew that keeping him
under her spell meant keeping him amused. To that end she put on constant theatrical productions at Versailles, in which she starred. She orgaw
nizecl elaborate hunting parties, masked balls, and whatever else it would
take to keep him diverted outside the bedroom. She became a patmness of
the arts, and the arbiter of taste and fashion for all of France. Her enemies
at the court only grew in number with each new success, but Madame de
Pompadour thwarted them in a
totally novel way for a
l-:ing’s mistress: with
extreme politeness. Snobs who resented her for her low birth she won over
with charm and grace. Most unusual of all, she befriended the queen, and
insisted that Louis XV pay more attention to his wife, and treat her more
kindly. Even the royal family hegmdgingly gave her their support. To
nature afmen is amhi»
lions us we’/I m‘ .\'u.\'pi—
(tour, and puts no
limits 10 one 3' gum!
{(>rnme, ll is not inqmsu
siblre rival the 5u.i'pir'1'an
that may sutldrmly be
amuslwl in the miml of
ihe prince {yr the
victory‘ oflhc gzermml
rrmv have been aggrw
V/marl by .\‘()me haughty
<=.rpre.«‘5i<:/Ix Hr imnlmx
acts an his 1>art;.m 1/mt
the prince will trmu—
rally be mods to think
ofxccurimg l1inx.wlf
against the umbmmr nf
Izrir general.
And to do (his, /ha
means mm xzrggesl
themselves to him are
either to have Jim
gemvml killed. or to
(feprivc him of rim:
reputmzvu which he
has ll(.‘I[ulI'é’(l with the
prince is army and the
people. by using ewr_)'
mmns Io pmve that the
general'S wcmry was
not due to his skill and
courage, but to chance
and (he cowardice of
the mcmy. or m the
sagaczry ofthr: nrhcr
cu,'7t.1in.V who were wi//1
him in (Ila! action.
Nl('(‘(lLO lVl.«\CI-HAVF.) Ll.
l4E:9—lS27
LAW 47 413
A mun who was
fulnmls or a t7't’¢'
climber was guiding
rmmwrze in climbing a
tall mu’. He mvlerml the
mom to our (ht! mp
brrmdiex, and. during
this time, when I/re rmm
seemed to by in great
dimgct; the expert mid
nothing. Only when the
mm: was contirig tlown
and had reached the
lurighl of the euvm (fill
the expert ml! out, “lie
mrefld! Watch your
step muting down!" I
asked him. “
VVI1y dérl
you my timl? At that
heiglil he t"(}‘ulclf'li!1Z[)
the ram‘ affine way ifiw
rkrise. "
"Tlmtir (lie point,
"
suit!
the éviparl. “As long as
the man was up at .2
dizzy height and the
lwrarzcher were threw’-
ening to break, he
izimself was so afraid I
sazrl notlxirzg. Misktkcs
are zzlwiiys made whwz
people get so the cm '
p[a(7$!.$'.
"
This man heltmgrd to
th( lower! class, bu! his
words were in pvrfiztl
¢l(.'L'(Ir(l with the
[ireccgm ofllzc sages. In
luutball low, they say
that uflvr you have
irirkcd out of a zlijficizll
plum and you think tin‘
Hex! one will by ca.v:'z~r
you are sure to mi.x‘.\‘ the
hall.
HSSAV5 IN l|)LlFOI ?k'l'El:N'|'H KEN I'll KY
414 LAW -17
crown her glory, the king made her a duchess. Her sway was felt even in
politics: Indeed she became the untitled minister of foreign affairs.
In 1751, when Madame de Pompadour was at the height of her power,
she experienced her worst crisis. Physically weakened by the responsibili—
ties of her position, she found it increasingly difficult to meet the king’s de~
mands in bed. This was usually the point at which the mistress would meet
her end, struggling to maintain her position as her beauty faded. But
Madame de Pompadour had a
strategy: She encouraged the king to set up
a kind of brothel, Pare aux Cerfs, on the grounds of Versailles. There the
middle-aged king could have liaisons with the most beautiful young girls in
the realm.
Madame de Pompadour knew that her charm and her political acu—
men had made her indispensable to the king. What did she have to fear
from a sixteen-year-old who had none of her power and presence? Vv'hat
did it matter if she lost her position in the bedroom, as long as she remained the most powerful woman in France? To secure that position she
became still closer friends with the queen, with whom she started attending
church. Although her enemies at the court conspired to have her toppled
from her official position as l<ing’s mistress, the king kept her on, for he
needed her calming elfect. It was only when her part in the disastrous
Seven Years’ War drew much criticism on her that she slowly withdrew
from public affairs.
Madame de Pompadour’s health had always been delicate, and she
died at the age of forty~three, in 1764. Her reign as mistress had lasted an
unprecedented twenty years. “She was regretted by all,” wrote the Due de
Croy, “for she was kindly and helpful to everyone who approached her.”
Interpretation
Aware of the temporariness of her power, the kings mistress would often
go into a kind of frenzy after capturing the king: She would try to accumulate as much money as possible to protect her afler her inevitable fall. And
to extend her reign as long as possible, she would be ruthless with her enemies in the court. Her situation, in other words, seemed to demand from
her a greed and vindictiveness that would often be her undoing. Madame
de Pompadour succeeded where all others had failed because she never
pressed her good fortune. Instead ofbullying the courtiers from her power»
ful position as the king’s mistress, she tried to win their support. She never
revealed the slightest hint of greed or arrogance. When she could no
longer perform her physical duties as mistress, she did not fret at the
thought of someone replacing her in bed. She simply applied some strategy--she encouraged the king to take young lovers, knowing that the
younger and prettier they were, the less of a threat they posed, since they
could not compare to her in charrn and sophistication and would soon
bore the monarch.
Success plays strange tricks on the mind. It makes you feel invulnera~
ble, while also making you more hostile and emotional when people chal-
lenge your power. It makes you less able to adapt to circumstance. You
come to believe your character is more responsible for your success than
your sirategizing and planning. Like Madame de Pompadour, you need to
realize that your moment of triumph is also a moment when you have to
rely on cunning and strategy all the more, consolidating your power base,
recognizing the role of luck and circumstance in your success, and remaining vigilant against changes in your good fortune. It is the moment of victory when you need to play the couttier's game and pay more attention
than ever to the laws of power.
The greatest danger occurs at the moment afvictory.
Napoleon {i(/nnpawz, I 76 9»!82 I
KEYS TO POWER
Power has its own rhythms and patterns. Those who succeed at the game
are the ones who control the patterns and vary them at will, keeping people off balance while they set the tempo. The essence ofstrategy is controlling what comes next, and the elation of victory can upset your ability to
control what comes next in two ways. First, you owe your success to a pat»
tern that you are apt to try to repeat. You will try to keep moving in the
same direction without stopping to see whether this is still the direction that
is best for you. Second, success tends to go to your head and make you
emotional. Feeling invulnerable, you make aggressive moves that ultimately undo the victory you have gained.
The lesson is simple: The powerful vary their rhythms and patterns,
change course, adapt to circumstance, and learn to improvise. Rather than
letting their dancing feet impel them forward, they step back and look
where they are going. It is as iftheir bloodstream bore a kind of antidote to
the intoxication of victory, letting them control their emotions and come to
a kind of mental halt when they have attained success. They steady themselves, give themselves the space to reflect on what has happened, examine
the role of circumstance and luck in their success. As they say in riding
school, you have to be able to control yourself before you can control the
horse.
Luck and circumstance always play a. role in power. This is inevitable,
and actually makes the game more interesting. But despite what you may
think, good luck is more dangerous than had luck. Bad luck teaches valu~
able lessons about patience, timing, and the need to be prepared for the
worst; good luck deludes you into the opposite lesson, making you think
your brillliance will cany you through. Your fortune will inevitably turn,
and when it does you will be completely unprepared.
According to Machiavelli, this is what undid Cesare Borgia. He had
many triumphs, was actually a clever strategist, but had the bad luck to
have good luck: He had a. pope for a father. Then, when he had bad luck
for real—his fathefs death—-he was unprepared for it, and the many ene~
LAW 47 -I15
416 LAW 47
mies he had made devoured him. The good luck that elevates you or seals
your success brings the moment for you to open your eyes: The wheel of
fortune will hurtle you down as easily as up. If you prepare for the fall, it is
less likely to ruin you when it happens.
People who have a run of success can catch a kind of fever, and even
when they themselves try to stay calm, the people below them often pres—
sure them to go past their mark and into dangerous waters. You have to
have a
strategy for dealing with these people. Simply preaching moderar
tion will make you look weak and small-minded; seeming to fail to follow
up on a
victory can lessen your power.
When the Athenian general and statesman Pericles led a series of
naval campaigns around the Black Sea in 436 u.(:., his easy triumphs enflamed the Athenians’ desire for more. They dreamed of conquering
Egypt, overrunning Persia, sailing for Sicily. On the one hand Pericles
reined in these dangerous emotions by warning of the perils of hubris. On
the other hand he fed them by fighting small battles that he knew he could
win, creating the appearance that he was preserving the momentum of suc»
cess. The skill with which Pericles played this game is revealed by what
happened when he died: The demagogues Cook over, pushed Athens into
invading Sicily, and in one rash move destroyed an empire.
The rhythm of power often requires an alternation of force and cunning. Too much force creates a counterreaction; too much cunning, no
matter how cunning it is, becomes predictable. Working on behalf of his
master, the shogun Oda Nobunaga, the great sixteenth-century japanese
general (and future emperor) Hideyoshi once engineered a stunning victory over the army of the formidable General Yoshimoto. The shogun
wanted to go further, to take on and crush yet another powerful enemy, but
Hideyoshi reminded him of the old Japanese saying: “When you have
won a
victory, tighten the strings of your helmet.” For Hideyoshi this was
the moment for the shogun to switch from force to cunning and indirection, setting his enemies against one another through a. series of deceptive
alliances. In this way he would avoid stirring up needless opposition by
appearing overly aggressive. When you are victorious, then, lie low, and
lull the enemy into inaction. These changes of rhythm are immensely
powerful.
People who go past the mark are often motivated by a desire to please
a master by proving their dedication. But an excess of effort exposes you to
the risk ofmaking the master suspicious of you. On several occasions, generals under Philip of Macedon were disgraced and demoted immediately
after leading their troops to a
great victory; one more such victory, Philip
thought, and the man might become a rival instead of an underling. When
you serve a master, it is often wise to measure your victories carefully, letting him get the glory and never making him uneasy. It is also wise to establish a pattern of strict obedience to earn his trust. In the fourth century
B.C., a. captain under the notoriously severe Chinese general Wu Ch’i
charged ahead before a battle had begun and came back with several
enemy heads. He thought he had shown his fiery enthusiasm, but Wu Ch’i
was unimpressed. “A talented officer,” the general said with a sigh as he ordered the man beheaded, “but a disobedient one.”
Another moment when 3. small success can spoil the chances for a
larger one may come if a master or superior grants you a favor: It is a dangerous mistake to ask for more. You will seem insecur%perhaps you feel
you did not deserve this favor, and have to grab as much as you can when
you have the chance, which may not come again. The proper response is
to accept the favor graciously and withdraw. Any subsequent favors you
should earn without having to ask for them.
Finally, the moment when you stop has great dramatic import. What
comes last sticks in the mind as a kind of exclamation point. There is no
better time to stop and walk away than after a
victory. Keep going and you
risk lessening the effect, even ending up defeated. As lawyers say of crossexamination, “Always stop with a victory.”
Image: Icarus Falling
from the Sky. His father
Daedalus fashions wings
of wax that allow the
two men to fly out of
the labyrinth and
escape the Minotaur.
Elated by the triumphant escape
and the feeling of
flight, Icarus soars
higher and higher. until the sun
melts the wings
and he hurtles
to his death.
Authority: Princes and republics should content themselves with victory,
for when they aim at more, they generally lose. The use of insulting language toward an enemy arises from the insolence of victory, or from the
false hope of victory, which latter misleads men as often in their actions
as in their words; for when this false hope takes possession of the mind,
it makes men go beyond the mark, and causes them to sacrifice a. certain good for an uncertain better. {Niccolo Machiavelli, 14694527)
LAW 47
‘
417
4'78 LAW 47
REVE R SAL
As Machiavelli says, either destroy a man or leave him alone entirely. Inflicting half punishment or mild injury will only create an enemy whose
bitterness will grow with time, and who will take revenge. When you beat
an enemy, then, make your victory complete. Crush him into nonexis
tence. In the moment of victory, you do not restrain yourself from crushing
the enemy you have defeated, but rather from needlessly advancing
against others. Be merciless with your enemy, but do not create new enemies by overreaching.
There are some who become more cautious than ever after a
victory,
which they see as just giving them more possessions to wony about and
protect. Your caution after victory should never make you hesitate, or lose
momentum, but rather act as a safeguard against rash action. On the other
hand, momentum as a phenomenon is greatly overrated. You create your
own successes, and if they follow one upon the other, it is your own doing.
Belief in momentum will only make you emotional, less prone to act strate»
gically, and more apt to repeat the same methods. Leave momentum for
those who have nothing better to rely upon.
48
ASSUME FORMLESSNESS
JUDGMENT
By taking a shape, by having a visible plan, you open
yoursesy" to attack. Instead of taking a
form. for your
enemy to grasp, keep yourselfadaptable and on the move.
Accept the fast that nothing is certain and no law is
fixed. The best way to protect yourself is to be as fluid
and formless as water; never bet on stability M lasting
order. Everything changvs.
419
In mania] am, it is
impormm that .struIi,'g_\'
he Awful/zrmuzhle, that
form be (’()(1L‘(’(.4[(’([. «ml
(hm IflU|’(’I?1<'MI.\‘ by
(nze.xpu'[z'd, so that
pre[1uri'dr1v\'v u;,'1Iim‘I
Ilmn he mzpnsri/715*.
W/ml (‘VIII/)/(‘V Ll gum]
general In wm wit/mm
fro’/1'5 ulwuyr having
um"allmmuhIi- wisdom
and a mm/us n/Jwanrli
rim! Imvm no mu‘l:\'
Only I}zr'f2:rr21l('.\',s‘
cannot be a/]l*clm!,
Sages‘ hide in nn/k((hoi/mhilily. so their /01’!-
irx;;s cmmuy be
0hservL'()',‘ I/my uywmrr
in fm‘nzIl'.\'.xm’\‘.s. so (heir
limnv mnnm he <'m.m'rl,
'l'Hl- nook (3|"l'|H*
llL./\l'V'AN .\1.\s1Hzs.
Cunm.
\‘F((J,'V‘l) (TN I'l'R‘-' |%.(‘
'|\IH_ I)‘)(. \\'ll ll HI!
I |€t)l’l’l-‘ll |:\I¢.\
"W/mt crime have I
umzmz'I1c>,d (hm I
.3’/Hill/II be I/ms muIi—
lured by my own
mu.s'Ivr? "pc;m'vely
L’.XL'[£IiIYl(’l[ ./(Iwlcr. u
vomxg n2u.\'Iij],' "llL»ri"s
a pretly irurulitiuu/"or a
dog Q/III)‘ prrlmnonxl
How am I xlzow my
fmrn nmung my
/'rz'<-,rid,\‘.7 0/1! king of
beans’, or rd!/yer their
lyrimt, who would dare‘
Io (rent you rhu.\'I"' llis‘
mmplu/nls‘ were not
unfoumletl, for that
very niorniim, his
nra.m'r, dr's])i1‘(‘ /he
/rizrrrrillg .\hri1'ki 0_/‘(Mr
yazmg friend, had
420 LAW 48
TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW
By the eighth century B.C., the city-states of Greece had grown so large and
prosperous that they had run out of land to support their expanding populations. So they turned to the sea, establishing colonies in Asia Minor,
Sicily, the Italian peninsula, even Africa. The city-state of Sparta, however,
was landlocked and surrounded by mountains. Lacking access to the
Mediterranean, the Spartans never became a seafaring people; instead
they turned on the cities around them, and, in a series of brutal, violent
conflicts lasting more than a hundred years, managed to conquer an immense area that would provide enough land for their citizens. This solution
to their problem, however, brought a new, more formidable one: How
could they maintain and police their conquered territories? The subordinate peoples they ruled now outmimbered them ten to one. Surely this
horde would take a horrible revenge on them.
Sparta’s solution was to create a
society dedicated to the art of war.
Spartans would be tougher, stronger, and fiercer than their neighbors. This
was the only way they could ensure their stability and survival.
When a Spartan boy reached the age of seven, he was taken from his
mother and placed in a military club where he was trained to fight and underwent the strictest discipline. The boys slept on beds of reeds; they were
allotted only one outer garment to wear for an entire year. They studied
none of the arts; indeed, the Spartans banned music, and permitted only
slaves to practice the crafts that were necessary to sustain them. The only
skills the Spartans taught were those of warfare. Children seen as weaklings
were left to die in a cavern in the mountains. No system of money or trading was allowed in Sparta; acquired wealth, they believed, would sow selfishness and dissension, weakening their warrior discipline. The only way a
Spartan could earn a
living was through agriculture, mostly on state—owned
lands, which slaves, called helots, would work for him.
The Spartans’ single-mindedness allowed them to forge the most powerful infantry in the world. They marched in perfect order and fought with
incomparable bravery. Their tighbknit phalamxes could vanquish an army
ten times their size, as they proved in defeating the Persians at Thermopylae. A Spartan column on the march would strike terror in the enemy; it
seemed to have no weaknesses. Yet although the Spartans proved them~
selves mighty warriors, they had no interest in creating an empire. They
only wanted to keep what they had already conquered and to defend it
against invaders. Decades would pass without a single change in the system
that had succeeded so well in preserving Spa.rta’s status quo.
At the same time that the Spartans were evolving their warlike culture,
another city—state was rising to equal prominence: Athens, Unlike Sparta,
Athens had taken to the sea, not so much to create colonies as for purposes
of trade. The Athenians became great merchants; their currency, the famous “owl coins,” spread throughout the Mediterranean. Unlike the rigid
Spartans, the Athenians responded to every problem with consummate
creativity, adapting to the occasion and creating new social forms and new
arts at an incredible pace. Their society was in constant flux. And as their
power grew, they came to pose a threat to the defense-minded Spartans.
In 4-31 B.C., the war that had been brewing between Athens and Sparta
for so long finally erupted. It lasted twenty—seven years, but after many
twists of fortune, the Spartan war machine finally emerged victorious. The
Spartans now commanded an empire. and this time they could not stay in
their shell. If they gave up what they had gained, the beaten Athenians
would regroup and rise against them, and the long war would have been
fought for naught.
After the war, Athenian money poured into Sparta. The Spartans had
been trained in warfare, not politics or economics; because they were so
unaccustomed to it, wealth and its accompanying ways of life seduced and
overwhelmed them. Spartan governors were sent to rule what had been
Athenian lands; far from home, they succumbed to the worst forms of corruption. Sparta had defeated Athens, but the fluid Athenian way of life was
slowly breaking down its discipline and loosening its rigid order. And
Athens, meanwhile, was adapting to losing its empire, managing to thrive
as a cultural and economic center.
Confused by a change in its status quo, Sparta grew weaker and
weaker. Some thirty years after defeating Athens, it lost an important battle
with the city-state of Thebes. Almost overnight, this once mighty nation
collapsed, never to recover.
Interpretation
In the evolution of species, protective armor has almost always spelled disaster. Although there are a few exceptions, the shell most often becomes a
dead end for the animal encased in it; it slows the creature down, making it
hard for it to forage for food and making it a
target for fast~moving predators. Animals that take to the sea or sky, and that move swiftly and unpre
djctably, are infinitely more powerful and secure.
In facing a serious problem~——controlling superior numbers—Sparta
reacted like an animal that develops a shell to protect itself from the environment. But like a turtle, the Spartans sacrificed mobility for safety. They
managed to preserve stability for three hundred years, but at what cost?
They had no culture beyond warfare, no arts to relieve the tension, a con
stant anxiety about the status quo. While their neighbors took to the sea,
learning to adapt to a world of constant motion, the Spartans entombed
themselves in their own system. Victory would mean new lands to govern,
which they did not want; defeat would mean the end of their military ma
chine, which they did not want, either. Only stasis allowed them to survive.
But nothing in the world can remain stable forever, and the shell or system
you evolve for your protection will someday prove your undoing.
In the case of Sparta, it was not the armies of Athens that defeated it,
but the Athenian money. Money flows everywhere it has the opportunity
to go; it cannot be controlled, or made to fit a prescribed pattern. It is inherently chaotic. And in the long run, money made Athens the conqueror,
bt1rb(u'ou.s'ly cu! ov/“f‘hi,V
fang pmrlmz ears‘.
Jowier (’X])8CIL‘(I null!‘
mg lets than to givv up
the ghost.
As he advmicml in
years, he pcrceivezl that
he gairwzl more than he
had lost by his mama»
rinrgfnr, Ewing naturally inclined E(>fl'g,‘IJI
with oilmrs, he would
often have rcmrnvd
/Itlmi’, with this part
dz'.s'figurcd in (J /mmlrrd
plm'1'.\'. A qum‘r'clmrn:=
dog always has has ear.-c
lacermed.
The (ex: we leave
others to lay hold of
the better. When one
has hm one point tr)
dwfmzd, it xlzoulcl be
prom-,m1 for fear nf
accident. Ta/<<' for
example’ _Mas!£'! Jowlcr,
who. being arrrwd with
(1 .\‘])i/{ed collar, and
having about as much
cur us a bird. (1 Wolf
would he puzzlwi 1:;
know where to
tackle him.
FABLES
JF,Al\' DE LA F0\I'l‘AINI;.
I621 I695
LAW ta 4.?!
Om’ sedzwlivr? and ulttl
mutely ulwu_V.\‘ frlllli
path has been the
dewelopmem of]W()f(’f.'<
Iivc armor. An organi.\‘r2r can protect itself by
crmcenlmem, by .y'wif1-
Hers mflighl, by e/[E10
rive coamwrartuck, by
uniting for mlark and
defense with other indivizfltaix ufils species
and also by encasing
itself within bony plates
and spines. . . .Almost
always the experiment
ofarmorfuiled. Crew
rurev adopting it tended
to become unwieldy,
They had 10 move relalive!)1 slowly. Hence
they were forced to live
mairtly on vcgemble
food; and thus in
genera! they were at if
dzimrivanrage as
compared with foes
:'i1=ir:g on more rapidly
“profitable
"
animal
food: The repeated faii«
ure r)/‘pro(ecIi1«'e armor
show: that, even at (1
somewhaz low evolw
Iionury level. mind
iriumphed over more
mamrr. It Lr this .\‘(V! of
Irhtmph wlzrriz has
him: .ruprr°meI_V Ilxrrrr
plified in Man.
S(‘lF,NTll l(‘ '1 HEORY
1\l\'l) RIIHUIUN.
E. W. B,»‘\RNl-.3.
1933
422 l LAW 43
by infiltrating the Spartan system and corroding its protective armor. In the
battle between the two systems, Athens was fluid and creative enough to
take new forms, while Sparta could grow only more rigid until it cracked.
This is the way the world works, whether for animals, cultures, or individuals. In the face of the world’s harshness and danger, organisms of any
kind develop protection-—a coat of armor, a
rigid system, a comforting ritual. For the short term it may work, but for the long term it spells disaster.
People weighed down by a system and inflexible ways ofdoing things can
not move fast, cannot sense or adapt to change. They lumber around more
and more slowly until they go the way of the brontosaurus. Learn to move
fast and adaptor you will be eaten.
The best way to avoid this fate is to assume formlessness. No predator
alive can attack what it cannot see.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
When World V\7ar II ended and the Japanese, who had invaded China
in 1937, had finally been thrown out, the Chinese Nationalists, lead by
Chiang Kai-shek, decided the time had come to annihilate the Chinese
Communists, their hated rivals, once and for all. They had almost succeeded in 1935, forcing the Communists into the Long March, the grueling
retreat that had greatly diminished their numbers. Although the Commu«
nists had recovered somewhat during the war against japan, it would not
be difficult to defeat them now. They controlled only isolated areas in the
countryside, had unsophisticated weaponry, lacked any military experience or training beyond mountain fighting, and controlled no important
parts ofChina, except areas of Manchutia, which they had managed to take
after the Japanese retreat. Chiang decided to commit his best forces in
Manclmria. He would take over its major cities and from those bases would
spread through this northern industrial region, sweeping the Communists
away. Once Manchuria had fallen the Communists would collapse.
In 1945 and ’46 the plan worked perfectly: The Nationalists easily
took the major Manchurian cities. Puzzlingly, though, in the face of this
critical campaign, the Communist strategy made no sense. When the Nationalists began their push, the Communists dispersed to Manchuria’s most
out-of—the-way corners. Their small units harassed the Nationalist armies,
ambushing them here, retreating unexpectedly there, but these dispersed
units never linked up, making them hard to attack. They would seize a
town only to give it up a few weeks later. Forming neither rear guards I101’
vanguards, they moved like mercury, never staying in one place, elusive
and formless.
The Nationalists ascribed this to two things: cowardice in the face
of superior forces and inexperience in strategy. Mao Tse~tung, the Com»
munjst leader, was more a poet and philosopher than a general, whereas
Chiang had studied warfare in the West and was a follower of the German
military writer Carl Von Clausewitz, among others.
Yet a pattern did eventually emerge in Mao‘s attacks. After the Nationalists had taken the cities, leaving the Communists to occupy what was generally considered Ma.nchun‘a’s useless space, the Communists started using
that large space to surround the cities. IfChiang sent an army from one city
to reinforce another, the Communists would encircle the rescuing army.
Chia.ng’s forces were slowly broken into smaller and smaller units, isolated
from one another, their lines of supply and communication cut. The Nationalists still had superior firepower, but if they could not move, what
good was it?
A kind of terror overcame the Nationalist soldiers. Commanders comfortably remote from the front lines might laugh ax Man, but the soldiers
had fought the Communists in the mountains, and had come to fear their
elusiveness. Now these soldiers sat in their cities and watched as their fastmoving enemies, as fluid as water, poured in on them from all sides. There
seemed to be millions of them. The Communists also encircled the soldiers’ spirits, bombarding them with propaganda to lower their morale and
pressure them to desert.
The Nationalists began to surrender in their minds. Their encircled
and isolated cities started collapsing even before being directly attacked;
one after another fell in quick succession. In November of 1948, the Nationalists surrendered Manchuria to the Communist»-a humiliafing blow
to the technically superior Nationalist army, and one that proved decisive
in the war. By the following year the Communists controlled all of China.
Interpretation
The two board games that best approximate the strategies of war are chess
and the Asian game of go. In chess the board is small. In comparison to go,
the attack comes relatively quickly, forcing a decisive battle. It rarely pays
to withdraw, or to sacrifice your pieces, which must be concentrated at key
areas. Go is much less formal. It is played on a
large grid, with 361 intersections——nearly six times as many positions as in chess. Black and white
stones (one color for each side) are placed on the board’s intersections, one
at a time, wherever you like. Once all your stories (52 for each side) are on
the board, the object is to isolate the stones of your opponent by encircling
them.
A game of go——called wet’-chi in China-can last up to three hundred
moves. The strategy is more subtle and fluid than chess, developing slowly;
the more complex the pattern your stories initially create on the board, the
harder it is for your opponent to understand your strategy. Fighting to control a particular area is not worth the trouble: You have to think in larger
terms, to be prepared to sacrifice an area in order eventually to dominate
the board. What you are after is not an entrenched position but mobility.
With mobility you can isolate the opponent in small areas and then encircle them. The aim is not to kill off the opponent’s pieces directly, as in
chess, but to induce a kind of paralysis and collapse. Chess is linear, position oriented, and aggressive; go is nonlinear and fluid. Aggression is indiTllli ll.\Rl-I AI\D
I'll!» 'l‘R|nlZ
The Sage nail/wr seeks
to follow the ways of
the rmrienls nor establirhes any fixed standard for all times‘ but
exantines the things a
f
his age and then
{3r€pun¢.\‘ to rich]
with (Item.
There was In Sung a
man, who tilled afield
in wliiclz tlzerc stoorl
Ilze trunk ofa tree.
Once a hare, while
rwmmg fast. rushed
uguénri the tmrzk,
broke its neck, and
died. Tlzeyeupon the
man am his plough
usiclc and watched (hm
tree, hoping that he
would gel anmlrer ham
Yet he never caught
rmorher hare and was
ltimself ridic':¢letI by Ike
people ofSung. Now
supposing sornebody
wanmd to govern the
people ofthe present
age will: the policies
ofrlze early kings. he
would be doing exactly
lire smne thing as that
man who warclzed the
tree’.
HAN-l‘l1l-'l’Zt..
CIIJNESF Pllll.0SOl'lIFR,
mun) <,r,:~ I run’ mr,
LAW i8 423
Ciolrudru! Rommel
mrpassed Parson as a
(‘rmlive imeliect. . . .
Roman’! sfmmwd miiimrry formalism. 11::
made #10 fixed plans
beyond those intended
for the inilial clash;
rlmrw/‘Ier, he tailored
his tactics to meet
specific sizmztions as
they arose. He was a
lightning-fa.s': dea‘.n‘onmaker. 111;)/sir‘a!Iy
mninluirtirtg ll pace that
matched his active
mentality. In a forbidding sea ofmml, he
operated in a
free erzwl
ronmem. Once
Rommel ruptured the
British lines in Africa.
he had (he whole
nortllem part a
f
the
continent opened
to him.
Cmnpamrively free
from the lzumszringing
aurlwrizy ofBenin,
disregarding nrdels
even from [filter
himself on occusion.
Rommel irnplmnmrml
one xucce.rsful operw
(hm uftrtr «mother until
he had most of North
Aj’r1c(: zmdcr his
control and (Tuiro
(rambling at his‘ feet.
THE‘ M41 or WINMNG
WARi
lAMr=.s NIRAZEK.
I968
424 LAW 45
rect until the end of the game, when the winner can surround the 0ppo—
nent’s stones at an accelerated pace.
Chinese military strategists have been influenced by go for centuries.
Its proverbs have been applied to war time. and again; Mao Tsemzng was
an addict of wei-chi, and its precepts were ingrained in his strategies. A key
wet‘-chi concept, for example, is to use the size of the board to your advan»
tage, spreading out in every direction so that your opponent cannot fathom
your movements in a simple linear way.
“Every Chinese,” Mao once wrote, “should consciously throw himself
into this war of a
jigsaw pattern” against the Nationalists. Place your men in
ajigsaw pattern in go, and your opponent loses himself trying to figure out
what you are up to. Either he wastes time pursuing you or, like Chiang Kai‘
shek, he assumes you are incompetent and fails to protect himself. And if
he concentrates on single areas, as Western strategy advises, he becomes a
sitting duck for encirclement. In the weiwhi way of war, you encircle the
enemy’s brain, using mind games, propaganda, and irritation tactics to
confuse and dishearten. This was the strategy of the Communis(s—an apparent foxmlessness that disoriented and terrified their enemy.
Where chess is linear and direct, the ancient game of go is closer to the
kind of strategy that will prove relevant in a world where battles are fought
indirectly, in vast, loosely connected areas. Its strategies are abstract and
multidimensional, inhabiting a plane beyond time and space: the sl:ratc~
gist’s mind. In this fluid form of warfare, you value movement over position. Your speed and mobility make it impossible to predict your moves;
unable to understand you, your enemy can form no strategy to defeat you.
Instead of fixing on particular spots, this indirect form of warfare spreads
out, just as you can use the large and disconnected nature of the real world
to your advantage. Be like a
vapor. Do not give your opponents anything
solid to attack; watch as they exhaust themselves pursuing you, trying to
cope with your elusiveness. Only formlessness allows you to truly surprise
your enemies—by the time they figure out where you are and what you are
up to, it is too late.
When you want tofight us, we don’t let you and you can ’tfind us. But when
we want tofight you, we make sure that you can ’z get away and we hit you
squarely. . . and wipe you out. . . . The enemy advances, we retreat; the em.-my
camps, we harms; the enemy tires, we attadc; the enemy retreats, we pursue.
Mao Tkevtung. 18934976
KEYS TO POWER
The human animal is distinguished by its constant creation of forms.
Rarely expressing its emotions directly, it gives them form through language, or through socially acceptable rituals. We cannot communicate our
emotions without a form.
The forms that we create, however, change constandymin fashion, in
style, in all those human phenomena representing the mood of the moment. We are constantly altering the forms we have inherited from previous generations, and these changes are signs of life and vitality. Indeed. the
things that don’t change, the forms that rigidify, come to look to us like
death, and we destroy them. The young show this most clearly: Uncomfortable with the forms that society imposes upon them, having no set identity, they play with their own characters, trying on a
variety of masks and
poses to express themselves. This is the vitality that drives the motor of
form, creating constant changes in style.
The powerful are often people who in their youth have shown im~
mense creativity in expressing something new through a new form. Society
grants them power because it hungers for and rewards this sort of newness.
The problem comes later, when they often grow conservative and possessive. They no longer dream of creating new forms; their identifies are set,
their habits congeal, and their rigidity makes them easy targets. Everyone
knows their next move. Instead ofdemanding respect they elicit boredom:
Get off the stage! we say, let someone else, someone younger, entertain us.
When locked in the past, the powerful look comica.l——they are overripe
fruit, waiting to fall from the tree.
Power can only thrive if it is flexible in its forms. To be formless is not
to be amorphous; everything has a form—~—it is impossible to avoid. The
formlessness of power is more like that of water, or mercury, taking the
form of whatever is around it. Changing constantly, it is never predictable.
The powerful are constantly creating form, and their power comes from
the rapidity with which they can change. Their formlessness is in the eye of
the enemy who cannot see what they are up to and so has nothing solid to
attack. This is the premier pose of power: Lmgraspable, as elusive and swift
as the god Mercury, who could take any form he pleased and used this
ability to wreak havoc on Mount Olympus.
Human creations evolve toward abstraction, toward being more rnen~
tal and less material. This evolution is clear in art, which, in this century,
made the great discovery of abstraction and conceptualism; it can also be
seen in politics, which over time have become less overtly violent, more
complicated, indirect and cerebral. Warfare and strategy too have followed
this pattern. Strategy began in the manipulation of armies on land, posi—
tioning them in ordered forrnations; on land, strategy is relatively two dimensional, and controlled by topography. But all the great powers have
eventually taken to the sea, for commerce and colonization. And to protect
their trading lanes they have had to learn how to fight at sea. Maritime warfare requires tremendous creativity and abstract thinking, since the lines
are constantly shifting. Naval captains distinguish themselves by their abil»
ity to adapt to the literal fluidity of the terrain and to confuse the enemy
with an abstract, hard—to—ant:icipate form. They are operating in a third dimension: the mind.
Back on land, guerrilla warfare too demonstrates this evolution toward
abstraction. T. E. Lawrence was perhaps the first modern strategist to de-
(Ill\l"x’\< Tlxll \Il\l(!l(
To tarry can (he
insliamual inhih2li(m
ciemamled by the
modern world and In
hr? able In cope‘ with the
mergy rllmx which
results from this mhihis
tion, the ego has In
1mrt'r.'rg0 41 change. The
ego. i.e.. that part of
the person lhal is
exposed to dangur.
bccanzex rigid, as we
say, wlwn il lr continuully .\‘uhje('Ied to lhc
smite or similar
c'on_f?z'cr.r between mar,-xi
and a j}'ur-inducing
outer world. I: acquirer
in this prr,7L't's.\' a
chronic, amommirally
funcrlmrirlg mmle of
reu1‘Iir7IL, i.e.. its “vim!-
(Ic'1er."II is as iftlre
a/"fecti vc personality
armored .
.j.' (Li ifthe
hard 5/zell it develops
were inlmdecl to deflect
and weaken the blows
of the outer world as
well as the rlurmrririg
ofme inner needs. This
armoriug maker the
person less smszrnre In
unpleasure. hm aim
reyrrim‘ Izil‘ libirlimzl
and ::ygre5sivz' motility
and thus ri‘(lll(‘E’S his
(1/z/uwityv for (1r,'IIimzemen! and pleasure. We
say the ego has become
l'c.c,\' flexible and more
rigid. 11/111 Ihu? {ht (rbiI~
fly to regulate me
enemy economy
deprenrlx rm the wrmnt
ofthe armnring.
VVIIHELM REWH.
l897-A1957
LAW 48 425
velop the theory behind this kind of warfare, and to put it into practice. His
ideas influenced Mao, who found in his writings an uncanny Western
equivalent to wei-chi. Lawrence was working with Arabs fighting for their
territory against the Turks. His idea was to make the Arabs blend into the
vast desert, never providing a
target, never collecting together in one place.
As the Turks scrambled to fight this vaporous army, they spread themselves thin, wasfing energy in moving from place to place. They had the superior firepower but the Arabs kept the inifiative by playing cat and
mouse, giving the Turks nothing to hold on to, destroying their morale.
“Most wars were wars of contact. . . .Ours should be a war of detachment,”
Lawrence wrote. “We were to contain the enemy by the silent threat of a
vast unknown desert, not disclosing ourselves till we attacked.”
This is the ultimate form of strategy. The war of engagement has hecome far too dangerous and costly; indirection and elusiveness yield far
better results at a much lower cost. The main cost, in fact, is mental-—the
thinking it takes to align your forces in scattered patiems, and to undermine the minds and psychology of your opponents. And nothing will infuriate and disoxient them more than formlessness. In a world where wars of
detachment are the order of the day, formlessness is crucial.
The first psychological requirement of formlessness is to train yourself
to take nothing personally. Never show any defensiveness. When you act
defensive, you show your emotions, revealing a clear form. Your opponents will realize they have hit a nerve, an Achilles’ heel. And they will hit
it again and again. So train yourself to take nothing personally. Never let
anyone get your back up. Be like a slippery ball that cannot be held: Let no
one know what gets to you, or where your weaknesses lie. Make your face
a formless mask and you will infuriate and disorient your scheming colleagues and opponents.
One man who used this technique was Baron James Rothschild. A
German Jew in Paris, in a culture decidedly unfriendly to foreigners, Rothschild never took any attack on him personally or showed he had been
hurt in any way. He furthermore adapted himself to the political climate,
whatever it wa.s«——-the stiffly formal Restoration monarchy of Louis XVIII,
the bourgeois reign of Louis-Philippe, the democratic revolution of 1848,
the upstart Louis-Napoleon crowned emperor in 1852. Rothschild accepted them one and all, and blended in. He could afford to appear hypocritical or opportunistic because he was valued for his money, not his
politics; his money was the currency of power. While he adapted and
thrived, outwardly never showing a form, all the other great families that
had begun the century immensely wealthy were mined in the period’s
complicated shifts and turns of fortune. Attaching themselves to the past,
they revealed their embrace of a form.
Throughout history, the formless style of ruling has been most adeptly
practiced by the queen who reigns alone. A queen is in a
radically diflerent
position from a. king; because she is a woman, her subjects and courtiers
are likely to doubt her ability to rule, her strength of character. If she favors
one side in some ideological struggle, she is said to be acting out of emotional attachment. Yet if she represses her emotions and plays the authoritarian, in the male fashion, she arouses worse criticism still. Either by
nature or by experience, then, queens tend to adopt a flexible style of governing that in the end often proves more powerful than the more direct,
male form.
Two female leaders exemplifying the forxnless style of rule are Queen
Elizabeth of England and Empress Catherine the Great of Russia. In the violent wars between Catholics and Protestants, Elizabeth steered a middle
course. She avoided alliances that would commit her to one side, and that
over time would harm the country. She managed to keep her country at
peace until it was strong enough for war. Her reign was one ofthe most glorious in history because ofher incredible capacity to adapt and her flexible
ideology.
Catherine the Great too evolved an improvisatory style of governing.
Afler she deposed her husband, Emperor Peter H, taking sole control of
Russia in 1762, no one thought she would survive. But she had no precon»
ceived ideas, no philosophy or theory to dictate her policies. Although a
foreigner (she came from Germany), she understood Russia’s moods, and
how it was changing over the years. “One must govern in such a way that
one’s people think they themselves want to do what one commands them
to do,” she said, and to do this she had to be always a step ahead of their
desires and to adapt to their resistance. By never forcing the issue, she re«
formed Russia in a strikingly short period of time.
This feminine, fomiless style ofruling may have emerged as a way of
prospering under difficult circumstances, but it has proved immensely seductive to those who have served under it. Being fluid, it is relatively easy
for its subjects to obey, for they feel less coerced, less bent to their mler’s
ideology. It also opens up options where an adherence to a doctrine closes
them off. Without committing to one side, it allows the ruler to play one
enemy off another. Rigid rulers may seem strong, but with time their inflexibility wears on the nerves, and their subjects find ways to push them
from the stage. Fle>u'ble, formless rulers will be much criticized, but they
will endure, and people will eventually come to identify with them, since
they are as their subjects are--changing with the wind, open to circumstance.
Despite upsets and delays, the permeable style of power generally tri~
umphs in the end, just as Athens eventually won victory over Sparta
through its money and its culture. When you find yourself in conflict with
someone stronger and more rigid, allow them a momentary victory. Seem
to bow to their superiority. Then, by being formless and adaptable, slowly
insinuate yourself into their soul. This way you will catch them off guard,
for rigid people are always ready to ward of‘! direct blows but are helpless
against the subtle and insinuating. To succeed at such a
strategy you must
play the cha.meleon—conform on the surface, while breaking down your
enemy from the inside.
LAW 48 E 427
428 LAW 48
For centuries the Japanese would accept foreigners graciously, and ap—
peared susceptible to foreign cultures and influences. joao Rodriguez, a
Portuguese priest who arrived in japan in 1577 and lived there for many
years, wrote, “I am flabbergasted by the Japanese willingness to my and accept everything Portuguese.” He saw japanese in the streets wearing Por—
tuguese clothing, with rosary beads at their necks and crosses at their hips.
This might seem like a weak, mutable culture, but ]apa.n’s adaptability
actually protected the country from having an alien culture imposed by
military invasion. It seduced the Portuguese and other Westerners into believing the japanese were yielding to a superior culture when actually the
foreign culture’s ways were merely a fashion to be donned and doffed.
Under the surface, Japanese culture thrived. Had the Japanese been rigid
about foreign influences and tried to fight them off, they might have suffered the injuries that the West inflicted on China. That is the power of
i'ormlessness—~—it gives the aggressor nothing to react against, nothing to hit.
In evolution, largeness is often the first step toward extinction. What is
immense and bloated has no mobility, but must constantly feed itself. The
unintelligent are often seduced into believing that size connotes power, the
bigger the better.
In 4-83 13.0., King Xerxes of Persia invaded Greece, believing he could
conquer the country in one easy campaign. After all, he had the largest
army ever assembled for one invasion-—the historian Herodotus estimated
it at over more than five million. The Persians planned to build a bridge
across the l-Iellespont to overrun Greece from the land, while their equally
immense navy would pin the Greek ships in harbor, preventing their
forces from escaping to sea. The plan seemed sure, yet as Xerxes prepared
the invasion, his adviser Artabanus warned his master of grave misgivings:
“The two mightiest powers in the world are against you,” he said. Xerxes
laughed-—what powers could match his gigantic army? “I will tell you what
they are,” answered Artabanus. “The land and the sea." There were no safe
harbors large enough to receive Xerxes‘ fleet. And the more land the Persians conquered, and the longer their supply lines stretched, the more ruinous the cost of feeding this immense army would prove.
Thinking his adviser a coward, Xerxes proceeded with the invasion.
Yet as Artabanus predicted, bad weather at sea decimated the Persian fleet,
which was too large to take shelter in any harbor. On land, meanwhile, the
Persian army destroyed everything in its path, which only made it impossi—
hie to feed, since the destruction included crops and stores of food. it was
also an easy and slowqnoving target. The Greeks practiced all kinds of de
ceptive maneuvers to disorient the Persians. Xerxes’ eventual defeat at the
hands of the Greek allies was an immense disaster. The story is emblematic
of all those who sacrifice mobility for size: The flexible and fleet of foot will
almost always win, for they have more strategic options. The more gigantic
the enemy, the easier it is to induce collapse.
The need for formlessness becomes greater the older we get, as we
grow more likely to become set in our ways and assume too rigid a form.
We become predictable, always the First sign of decrepitude. And pre~
dictability makes us appear comical. Although ridicule and disdain might
seem mild forms of attack, they are actually potent weapons, and will even~
tually erode a foundation of power. An enemy who does not respect you
will grow bold, and boldness makes even the smallest animal dangerous.
The late-eighteenth-ceniniry court of France, as exemplified by MarieAntoinette, had become so hopelessly tied to a
rigid formality that the
average Frenchman thought it a silly relic. This depreciation of 21 centuriesold institution was the first sign of a terminal disease, for it represented a
symbolic loosening of the people’s lies to monarchy. As the situation worsened, Marie-Antoinette and King Louis XVI grew only more rigid in their
adherence to the past—and quickened their path to the guillotine. King
Charles I of England reacted similarly to the tide of democratic change
brewing in England in the 1630s: He disbanded Parliament, and his court
rituals grew increasingly formal and distant. He wanted to return to an
older style of ruling, with adherence to all kinds of petty protocol. His
rigidity only heightened the desire for change. Soon, of course, he was
swept up in a devastating civil war, and eventually he lost his head to the
executioner’s axe.
As you get older, you must rely even less on the past Be vigilant lest
the form your character has taken makes you seem a relic. It is not a matter
of mimicking the fashions of youtl1—that is equally worthy of laughter.
Rather your mind must constantly adapt to each circumstance, even the inevitable change that the time has come to move over and let those of
younger age prepare for their ascendancy. Rigidity will only make you
look uncannily like a cadaver.
Never forget, though, that fonnlessuess is a strategic pose. It gives you
room to create tactical surprises; as your enemies struggle to guess your
next move, they reveal their own strategy, putting them at a decided disad—
vantage. It keeps the initiative on your side, putting your enemies in the
position of never acting, constantly reacting. It foils their spying and intelligence. Remember: Formlessness is a tool. Never confuse it with a go~withthe~llow style, or with a
religious resignation to the twists of fortune. You
use formlessness, not because it creates inner harmony and peace, but because it will increase your power.
Finally, learning to adapt to each new circumstance means seeing
events through your own eyes, and often ignoring the advice that people
constantly peddle your way. It means that ultimately you must throw out
the laws that others preach, and the books they write to tell you what to do,
and the sage advice of the elder. “The laws that govern circumstances are
abolished by new circumstances,” Napoleon wrote, which means that it is
up to you to gauge each new situation. Rely too much on other people’s
ideas and you end up takinga form not of your own making. Too much re«
spect for other people’s wisdom will make you depreciate your own. Be
brutal with the past, especially your own, and have no respect for the
philosophies that are foisted on you from outside.
LAW 4 8 429
430 LAW 43
Im age: Mer cury. The winged messenger,
god of commerce, patron saint of thieves,
gamblers, and all those who deceive through
swiftness. The day Mercury was born he invented
the lyre; by that evening he had stolen the cattle of
Apollo. He would scour the world, assuming
whatever form he desired. Like the liquid metal
named after him, he embodies the elusive,
the ungraspable——the power of formlessness.
Authority: Therefore the consummation of forming an army is to arrive
at formlessness. Victory in war is not repetitious, but adapts its form
endlessly. . . .A military force has no constant formation, water has no
constant shape: The ability to gain victory by changing and adapting ac
cording to the opponent is called genius. (Sun-tzu, fourth century B.c.)
REVERSAL
Using space to disperse and create an abstract pattern should not mean forsaking the concentration of your power when it is valuable to you. Form~
lessness makes your enemies hunt all over for you, scattering their own
forces, mental as well as physical. When you finally engage them, though,
hit them with a powerful, concentrated blow. That is how Mao succeeded
against the Nationalists: He broke their forces into small, isolated units,
which he then could easily overwhelm with a strong attack. The law of con—
centration prevailed.
When you play with formlessness, keep on top of the process, and
keep your longeterm strategy in mind. When you assume a form and go on
the attack, use concentration, speed, and power. As Man said, “When we
fight you, we make sure you can’t get away.”
SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY
Aesop. Fables ofAesop. Translated by S. A. Hanford. New York: Penguin
Books, 1954.
Bloodworth, Dennis and Ching Ping. The Chinese Machiavelli. New York:
Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1976.
Bowyer, J. Baxton. Cheating: Deception in War and Magic, Games and Sports,
Sex and Religion, Business and Con Games, Politics and Espionage, Art and
Science. New York: St. Martirfs Press, 1982.
Castiglione, Baldesar. The Book afthe Courtiar. Translated by George Bull.
New York: Penguin Books, 1976.
Clausewitz, Carl von. On War. Edited and translated by Michael Howard
and Peter Paret. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1976.
Elias, Norbert. 7713 Court Society. Translated by Edmund jephcott. Oxford:
Basil Blackwell Publishers, 1983.
de Francesco, Grete. The Power of the Charlatan. Translated by Miriam
Beard. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1939.
Haley, Jay. The Power Ihttics ofJesus Christ and Other Essays. New York:
W. W. Norton. 1989.
Han—fei-tzu. The Complete Wbrlcs qfHan-fei'~tz’u. Translated by W. K. Liao.
2 volumes. London: Arthur Probsthain, 1959.
Herodotus. The Histories. Translated by Aubrey de Sélincourt. New York:
Penguin Books, 1937.
Isaacson, Walter. Kissinger: A Biography. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1992.
La Fontaine, jean de. Selected Fables. Translated by James Michie. New
York: Penguin Books, 1982.
Lenclos, Ninon de. Life, Letters and Epicurean Philosophy afNz'non dc Lmclos,
27w Celebrated Beauty qfthe Tit}: Centwy. Chicago: Lion Publishing C0,,
1903.
'
Ludwig, Emil. Bi.rmarck.' The Story of a
fighter. Translated by Eden and
Cedar Paul. Boston: Little, Brown, 1928.
Machiavelli, Niccolo. The Prince and The Discourses. Translated by Luigi
Ricci and Christian E. Detmold. New York: Modern Library, 1940.
Mao Tse-tung. Selected Militaiy Writing: zfMao 1.’ce—zung. Beijing: Foreign
Languages Press, 1963.
Millan, Betty. Monstrous Regiment: Wbmen Rulers in Men? Wbrlds. Windsor
Forest, Berks, U.K.: Kensal Press, 1983.
BIBLIOGRAPHY 43 1
432 BIBLIOGRAPHY
Montaigne, Michel de. The Complete Esrays. Translated by M. A. Screech.
New York: Penguin Books, 1987.
Mrazek, Col. James. fI71eArt ofWinning Wars. New York: Walker and Company, 1968.
Nash, jay Robert. Hustlers and Con Men. New York: M. Evans and Co.,
1976. V
Nietzsche, Friedrich. The Birth ofTragedy and The Genealogy ofMoral.r. Translated by Francis Golffing. Garden City: Doubleday Anchor Books,
1956.
Orieux, jean. Talleymrzd: The Art ofSurvival. Translated by Patricia Wolf.
New York: Knopf, 1974.
Plutarch. Makers ofRome. Translated by Ian Scott-Kilvert. New York: Penguin Books, 1965.
———-. The Rise and Fall ofAt/tens. Translated by Ian Scott-Kilvert New York:
Penguin Books, 1960.
Rebhom, Wayne A. Foxes and Lz'on.r: Machiavelli? Confidence Men. Ithaca:
Cornell University Press, 1988. ,
de Retz, Cardinal. Memoirs ofjean Frangois Paul ale Gonzli, Cardinal de Retz,
2 vols. London: M. Dent & Sons, 1917.
Sadler, A. L. Ciro-no-ya: The Japanese Ila Ceremony. Rutland, Vermont:
Charles E. Tuttle Company, 1962.
Scharfstein, Ben—Ami. AmomlPolitics. Albany: State University ofNew York
Press, 1995.
Scheibe, Karl E. Mirrors, Mar/cs, Lies and Secretx. New York: Praeger Publish~
ers, 1979.
Schopenhauer, Arthur. The Wisdom ofLife and Counsel: and Maxim. Trans»
lated by T. Bailey Saunders. Amherst, New York: Prometheus Books,
1995.
Senger, Harro von. The Book ofStratagems: Ilzcticrflrr Triumph and Survival.
Edited and translated by Myron B. Gubitz. New York: Penguin Books,
1991.
Siu, R. G. H. fire Crafl ofPower. New York: john Wiley & Sons, 1979.
Sun-tzu. The Art of War. Translated by Thomas Cleaxy. Boston: Shambhala,
1988.
Thucydides. Y7re History ofthe Peloponnesian War. Translated by Rex Warner.
New York: Penguin Books, l972.
Wei], “Yellow Kid.” The Con Game and "Yellow Kid” Weil: 77reAutobx’ogmphy
ofthe Famous Con Artist as told to W T Brannon. New York: Dover Publications, 1974.
Zagorin, Perez. Way: ofLying: Dissirnulation, Persecution and Conformity in
Early Modern Europe. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1990.
INDEX
Italicpage references indicate Alexander III “the Great,”
sidebars. King, 47, 182-83,
331-32, 355, 355,
Abraham, 73-74 377-72
absence, 364 father and, 350-552
using to increase respect Alexander VI, Pope, 150,
and honor, 115-22 151, 176-77, 202, 308
abstraction, 425-26 Alexandra, Czarina, 364
Académie Frangtaise, Alfonso I, King, 187
306 Algardi, Alessandro, 357
accomplishments: Ali, Muhammad, 129
as effortless, 245-53 Always say less than necand following a famous essary (Law 4),
predecessor, 347-57 31-36
achievements of others, Amasis, 72-73
using, 60 American Institute of
acting, 196, 198, 199 Electrical Engineers,
act'1on(s): 58
entering with boldness, American Museum, 45-46
227-35 Amschel, Mayer, 1713
security and, 355 Ancient Chinese Parables (Yu
waiting and, 296 Hsiu Sen, ed.), 777
winning flirongh argu— anger, xix, xx, 332
ment vs., 69-75, 378 repression of, 329
Adam '5 Cum (Yeats), 250 and stirring up waters to
adaptability, 419 catch fish, 325-32
admiration, 405 tantrums, 327, 329, 331
Aeschylus, 405 animal magnetism,
Aesop, .95, 740, 233, 237, 223-24
335, 367, 370 “Animals Stricken with the
African folktale, 70 Plague, The“ (La
Aglauros, 403-4
Aguirre, Lope de, I33-40
Aike1'1,]ohn, 772- 73
Alben, Prince, 55
Albizzi family, 403-4
Albrecht, King, 361
alchemy, 264-65, 270 appea.tance(s), xx, xxx”, 44,
Alcibiades, 148,360, 143, 147, 204, 251,
381-82 364
Alencon, Duke of, 146, cafs-paw and, 209
277 jokes about, 181, 185
Alexander I, Czar, 63 of perfection, 400-409
Fontaine), 38-40
Anjou, Duke of, 146-47
Anne, Queen, 337
Anne ofC1eves, 394
Antony, Marc, 207,
370- 1 7
spectacles and, 309
Arabs, 426
Aretino, Pietro, 46, 48,
175, 232, 288-89,
307
patronage strategy of,
338-40
argument:
emotions and, 322
winning through actions
vs., 69-75, 378
Aristides. 359
aristocratic pose, 282-90
Aristotle, 182-83
Arlen, Michael, .32
Armenian Foil:-tales andF12-
bks, Retold by Charles
Dawning, 257
armor, protective, 421,
422, 42.5
Arnold, Philip, 157-59,
l60—-61
arrogance, 287
arrogant and pmud man,
dealing with, 138
arrow, image of, 176
Arsinoe, 207
Artabanus, 428
art dealers, M2-43
Duveen, see Duveen,
Joseph
Picasso and, 127-28,
149
Vollard, ‘Z60
anists, Renaissance, 251
Art ofCro:.v~Exam1'natian,
The (Wellman), 472
Art nfWar, T714 (Sun-tzu),
105, 111
Art qfW211‘, I718 (Zhemg
Yu), 67
Art ofI4/Tuning Wars, 7712
(Mrazek), 424
INDEX 433
434 I INDEX
asking for too little, 234
“Ass and the Gardener,
The” (Indian fable),
302
associations;
in mirrored situations,
390-91
with unhappy and unlucky people,
76-81
Assume formlessness (Law
43), 419-30
Assyrians, 118, 412
Astyages, King, 411
Atahualpa, King, 359, 350.
365
Atheism Conquered (Campanella), 320-21,
322
Athens, 97-98, 148,
164-65, 16?, 203,
318, 354, 359-61,
407, 416, 420-22
banishment in, 359,
360, 361
Sicily invaded by, 172,
241-42, 305, 381,
416
war between Spam:
and, 421-22, 427
attacks, 419
deflecting of, 306
fast, 68
taking personally, 426
attention:
courting of, 44-55, 191,
194, 229
paid to an enemy, 300
unconventional ideas
and, 317
audacity (boldness),
227-35, 288, 429
development of,
233-34
hesitation compared
with, 228429
Augusta, Queen, 279-80
Augustus, Emperor, 353
Aurelian, Emperor,
.39.3~.94
Austria, 159~60, 239-41
Ausuhel, Nathan, 753-54,
207, 223-24
authority, fear and, 228
autonomy, 152, 153, 154
Avery, Ephraim K, 45
Avoid stepping into a
great ma.u’s shoes
(Law -:1), 347-57
Azebn Gallax, 328
Aztecs, 203, 365
Bacon, Francis, 407
bad news, bearing of, 180
bait, 62-68
resisting, 296—97
Balaun, Guillaume de,
-
ll6—17
Balboa, Vasco Nfifiez de,
59, 237-39
Balcha, Dejazmach, 26-27
Balzac, Honoré de, xx
banishmeng 358, 361, 363
in Athens, 359, 360, 361
Bardas, 9, 13
bargain demons, 334-35
Bmjac, Pierre de, 116
Barlow, Samuel L., 157
Barnes, E. W., 422
Barnum, P. T., 30, 42,
45-47, 253, 270, 346
Barry, Madame du,
348~39
Basilius, Emperor, 9-10
Batchelor, Charles, 57
Bathsheba, and David, 272
Bavaria, Duke of, 265, 270
Bay of Figs, 305
bean geste, 198
Beauvallon, jean-Baptiste
Rosemond de, 77
behaving like others,
while thinking as
you like, 317-24
Behind Ike Seems ofRqyal
Palaces in Korea (Ha
Tae-Hung), 230-32
Bekbulatovich, Simeon,
384-85
Belgium, 240
belief, peop1e’s need for,
215-26
Belloc, Hilaire, 307
Bengal, 352
Benjamin, Walter, 240
Berenice, 206
Bergman, Ingmar, 408
Bernini, Pietro, 357
Be royal in your own fashion: act like a king to
be treated like one
{Law 34), 282—-90
Bertrand, Louis, 33
Best Fable: 0fLa I'lmtaz'ne,
17:2, see La Fontaine,
jean de, fables of
Bible, 122
Genesis, 406
Kings, 23-24
Matthew, 169
Second Book of
Samuel, 272
Billy Budd (Melville), 408
Bin:h,_]ona.than. 328
Bismarck. Otto Von,
19-20, 60, 6-1, 85,
239-41, 242-43,
279-80, 323
Austrian negotiator and,
159-60
goal of, 240-41, 242-43
rise to power of, 83~84,
85
role~playing ofi I98
speeches of, 19-20, 21,
279
Virclzow and, 255
Bisticci, Vespasiano da,
404
Blacks, the, and the
Whites, 153, 361-62
black sheep, image of,
324
blame:
scapegoat and, 201-5,
2 14
taking, 214
blending in, 29, 317
Blenheim, 337—38
Blome, Count, 160
Bloodwortll, Dennis,
294-95
Blue Buy, The (Gaimbov
ough), 27849
Bogart, Humphrey, 87
boldness, 22”/‘~35, 288,
429
development of,
233-34
hesitation comparecl
with, 228-429
Boleyn, Anne, 303, 304,
393
Bonaparte, Louis. 242
Boniface V111 (Cardinal
Gaetani), 361-62
Bani: ofFizre Rings, A
{Musaahi), 78, .379
Book ofGovemmmt or Rules
fir Kings, Ihe (alMulk), 338-40
Book ofthe Caurtier, He
(Castiglione), 250-51
Baolc ofthe Hzmimm Masters,
The, 420
Borgia, Cesare, 5, 68, 151,
152, 176-77, 202,
303, 415-16
de Oreo and, 202-3,
204
negotiations of, 298
at Sinigaglia, 708- 70
Borgias, I71: (Cloulas),
708- 70
Borri, Francesco
Giuseppe, 90,
219-20
Borromini, Francesco, 357
Bourbon, Antoine de, 277
Bourbon, Henri de, 277
“Boy and the Nettle, The”
(Aesop), 233
boydrs, 230-31, 255-56,
384, 385, 407
Bragadino, [1, 264-66,
267, 270
Bramante, Donato, 402
409
Brecht, Bertolt, 165-67,
168, 197-98, 322-23
Bmmmell, George
“Beau,” 185
Brunelleschi, Filippo,
66-67, 404
Bmms, 80, 193
buried treasure, 334-35
Burton, Richard, 198
Butler, Benjamin, 157
Byron, George Gordon,
Lord, 185
Caesar, Julius, 80, 323,
353
Cleopatra and, 193,
198, 206-7, 353
death of, 193
ax Pharsalia, 278-79
public image of, 192-93
Rubicon crossing of,
192, 198
Caligula, 324
Callisthenes, 182-83
“Camel and the Floating
Sticks, The” (La
Fontaine), 776
Camillus, 93
Campanella, Tommaso,
319-21, 322, 323
Capone, Al, 90, 91
Caravan ofDreamr (Shah),
119, 238-39, 305
Caréme, Marie-Antoine,
341
Carmagnola, Count of, 83,
84
Carpi, Ugo da, 46
Carranza, Venusiiano, 301,
302
Carroll, Lewis, 379
Casanova, Giovanni, 42,
175, 7.92, 233, 334
Cassius, 80, 193
Custiglione, Baldassare, 9,
43, 47
on nonchalance,
250-51, 252
Castlereagh, Viscount, 64
Castracani, Castruccio,
96-97, 153
Castro, Fidel, 305
car, image of, 398
Catherine de’ Médicis,
Queen, 214, 277-78
Catherine ofAragon,
303-4, 393
Catherine the Great, Empress, 427
Catholicism, 319-21, 328,
361, 393-94
cafs-paw, 206-14
image of, 213
mistakes in using, 214
two uses of, 209
“Cat 'I11atWa.1ked By
Himself, The”
(Kipling). 34
Cavaignac, Louis Eugéne,
242
Cecil, Robert, 364
center of power, striking
at, 358-66
change, 425
fantasy of transforrnatron vs., 267
reform and, 3§2~§9
Cha~no-yu Uapanese tea
ceremony}, 5, 209,
210, 211-6, 306, 373,
325, 343, 344,
388
Cha-no-yu: I71:japanesa Téa
Ctrmwny (Sadler),
246-47, 373, 326-27
Chan, 186
Chapman, Walker, 138-40
character, 191, 195
charlazanism, 216-19
Charles 1, King, 290, 429
Charles V, Emperor, 47,
121, 152, 175, 340
Charles IX, King, 214, 277
Charles X, King, 283
Charleval, 257
Chixteauroux, Duchesse
de, 413
“Chelm justice” (Yiddish
folktale), 207
Cheng, 141-42
Ch’en Po-ca, 204
chess, 126, 352-53, 423,
424
World Championship
of, 124-26
Chester-field, Philip
Dormer Stanhope,
Lord, xviii, 144
Chesterton, G. K., 301
Chiang Kai—shek, 112,
208-9, 422-23, 424
Ch’ien Shu, King, 11
Chih, Earl, 94
childhood weaknesses,
272-73
Chin, [53
Clfin, Emperor, 395
China, 10, 11, 14, 91, 92,
11 1, 186
Chiang Kai-shek in,
112, 208-9, 422-23,
424
Chin/Hsing struggle in,
153
Ch’in Shih Huang Ti in,
131-32
Chuko Liang in, 38-39,
211-12, 370-71,
372-73, 395, 396
Ch'ung-erh in, 141-42
Communists vs. Nationalists in, 112, 208-9,
422-23, 424, 430
Emperor Sung in, 10-12
Empress W11 in, 110-1 1,
1 13
Han Dynasty in, 10,
183, 201
INDEX 435
436 INDEX
China (cont)
Hsiang Yu/Liu Pang
struggle in, 108-10
_]apa.n’s invasion ofl 14,
112, 208-9, 422
King Goujian in, 168
Kissinger and, 61, 149
Mao Tse-tung in, see
Mao Tse-tung
Mongol invasion of, 99
Nixon’s visit to, 61
Ts’ao Ts’ao in, 201-2,
203, 330, 372-73
27 Historic: in, 183
Wang Mang in, 397
War of the Three Kingdoms in, 38
Wei kingdom in, 41
Wu/Middle Kingdom
war in, 172
Chinese Looking Glass, The
(Bloodworth), 2.94-.95
Chinese parables, 777,
337-38
Chinese sayings, 152, 160,
361
Ch’in Shih Huang Ti, Emperor, 131-32
choice, controlling options
in, 254-62
Choiseul, Etienne de,
348-49
Chopin, Frédéric, 194
Chosmes II, King, 104-5
Chou Yung, 296
Christianity, 393
Christina, Queen, 220
Chnstznas, 3.93-.94
Chuko Liang, 38-39,
211-12, 370-71,
372-73
Mao Tsetung and, 395,
396
Ch‘un_g-erh, 141-42
Churchill, Winston, 106
painting of, 188-89
Church ofEngland, 304
Ch’u-Ts'a.i, Yelu, 99
Cicero, 134
Clrnon, 407
“Citizen and the Traveller,
The” (Stevenson),
322
Civil War, 127
Sherman’s march in,
260-61
Claudius 1, Emperor, 160
Clausewitz, Carl V011, 112,
174, 237, 422
clean hands, 200-214
Cleaiy, Thomas, 25, 738
Cleisthenes, 285-87
Clement VII, Pope, 303,
304, 393
Cleopatra, 193, 198,
206-8, 209, 353
Antony and, 207,
370- 7 7
Cloulas, Ivan, 708- 70
Cohn, Harry, 86-87
Colbert, ‘jean-Baptiste, 2,
5
Coligny, Gaspard de, 214
Cologne (Turner), 188
color, 314
Columbia Pictures, 86, 87
Columbus, Christopher,
234, 237, 284-86
Columbus Strategy, 288
common touch, 317, 323
commitmeng to others,
145-55
Communists, 176, 323
Chinese, 112, 208-9,
422-23, 424; see also
Mao Tse-tung
House Un-American
Activities Committee
and, 86-87, 165-67,
197-98, 322-23
compelling spectacles, creation of, 309-16
con ardsts, 52, 90, 91, 260,
268, 323, 334
aristocratic front used
by, 288
Arnold and Slack,
157-59, 160-61
boldness in, 228
Bragadino, 264-66,
267, 270
Crowningsfleld, 92
free lunch and, 346
Furey’s ring of, 140-41
Hartzell, 268
isolation used by, 364
Lusijg, see Luslig, Victor
Stavisky, 260
Weil, see Weil, Joseph
“Yellow Kid”
concealment:
of mistakes, by use of
scapegoat, 201-5,
214
of tricks and techniques,
245, 247, 251-52
Conceal your intentions
(Law 3), 16-30
Concentrate your forces
(Law 23), 171-77
Concini, Concino, 274,
275
Condé, Louis, Prince of,
277
Condivi, Ascanio, 406-8
mndottieri (mercenary soldiers), 83, 708- 70
conflict, fantasy of union
vs., 268
conformity, outward display of, 317-24, 398
Confucius, 131, 353, 395,
396, 397
Congress ofVienna, 63,
94, 104, 184-85
Conquest LyVPeru, 172:
(Prescott), 35.9-60
conservatism, 394, 398,
425
Constantine, Emperor,
314, 393
contempt, 305, 307, 308
contrasts, between overt
traits and weaknesses, 273
Control the options: get
others to play with
the cards you deal
(Law 31), 254-62
controversy, 48
cord that binds, image of,
100
Corella, Michelotbo,
709- 70
Corfu (Corcyra), 97-98
Corinth, 97-98
Coriolanus, Gnaeus Marcius, 32-33
Cortés, Hernando, 365
Co\1nter~ReformaIion, 319
court, courtiers, courting,
xvii-xoiii, 146-49,
178-90, 211, 398
cat’s-paw and, 212
nonchalance in, 250-51
symbols and, 315
Court Artist, The (Warnke),
46-47
Court attention at all cost
(Law 6), 44-55
Courtiefs Mirror, 378, 388
CM}? qfhwer, T31: (Sin),
207-8, 247-48, 2.95
Create compelling spectacles (Law 37),
309-16
creativity, 425
credit, for work done by
others, 56-61
criticism, of those above
you, 181
Croesus, 411
Cromwell, Oliver, 290
Cromwell, Thomas,
393-94, 398
cross and the sun, image
of, 316
cross-examination, 4572
“Crow and the Sheep,
The” (Aesop), 740
“Crow—Hen, the Cobra,
and the Jackal, The”
(Panchatantra tale),
207-8
Crown, image of, 289
Ctowningsfield,_]ohn, 92
Croy, Duc de, 414
Crush your enemy totally
(Law 15), 107-14
Cuba, 305
cultlike following, creation
of, 215-26
culture(s):
different, 267-68, 3l9
vacuums in, 353-54
cyclone, image of, 128
cynicism, 181
Cyprus, 264, 318
Cyrus the Great, 368-69,
41 1 -12
Daizen, Kuriyama, 209-ll
Damon, 359-60
dance of the veils, image
of, 54
danger, in isolation,
130-36
Dante Aligliieti, 361-62
Darien, 23?, 238
Darnley, Lord, 14?
Darwin, Charles, 398
David, and Baihsheba, 272
David and Goliath Strategy, 288
Dévila, Pedro Arias {Fe
clraxias), 233, 239
deadlines, setting for others, 297-98
death:
absence and, 120
fantasy of reversal of,
268-69
Deceivefls Mirror, 379,
388-89
deception, xx~xx:', 23,
27-28, 36
controlling the options
and, 254-62
courtiemhip and, 190
cultlike following and,
216
distraction and, 91, 92
gifts and, 92
imagery and, 311
intelligence and, 161
isolation in, 364
kindness and, 93
mirror effect in, 376-91
reputation for, 30, 42
smoke screens in, 23,
27, 28, 29, 30, 36,
129
verbal arginnent and, 74-
decoyed objects of desire,
17, 21, 28
defects, shared, 81
defensiveness, 426
de fleury, Andre-Hercule,
348
de Ganlle, Charles, 315
Deioces, 118-19, 120
Denmark, 239, 240
de Orco, Remirro, 202-3,
204
dependence:
mutual, 88
of others, 82-88
Dermi.rProbe, The (Sh ),
336-37
desire, 305
Despise the free lunch
(Law 40), 333-46
diamond mine, 157-59
Diana (roman goddess),
312, 313, 314, 315
Diane de Poitiers, 9, 278,
31 l-13, 315
Diderot, Denis, 195, 196
dignity, 288, 331
Dinocrates, 47
di Prime, Diane, 337-38
Disarm and infuriate with
the mirror effect
(Law 44), 376-91
Discourses (Machiavelli),
472- 73
Discover each man’s
thumbscrew (Law
33), 271-81
Disdain things you cannot
have: ignoring them
is the best revenge
(Law 36), 300-308
dishonesty:
reputation for, 30, 42
and selective honesty,
89
dispersion offorces,
176-77
displaying your talents,
and outshining mas»
ter, 1-7
Disraeli, Benjamin, 74
distance, in fantasy, 269
distraction, in deception,
91, 92
“Ditch High Priest"
(Kenl(6), 32.9
Dodsley, Robert, 85, 296
“Dog with the Cropped
Bars, The” (La
Fontaine), 420-Z7
Do not build fortresses to
protect youiself-—is<r
laxion is dangerous
{Law 18), 130-36
Do not commit to anyone
(Law 20), 145-55
Do not go past the mark
you aimed for: in
victory, learn when
to stop (Law 47),
410- 18
Doria, Andrea, 708
Dostoyevsky, Fyodor, 355
Downing, Charles, 256-57
Drake swindle, 268
drama, 197, 199
Drew, Daniel, 66
du Barry, Madame,
34-8-49
Duchamp, Marcel, 35, 53
Dudevam, Aurore Dupin
(George Sand),
194-95, 195, 306
Dudley, Robert, 146
INDEX 437
438 -
INDEX
Dujarier, Alexandre, 77
Dutch Lowlands, 146
Duveemjoseph, 102-3,
120, 298
Diirer painting and,
161—-62
Ford and, 142-43
Huntington and, 278-79
Mellon and, 28, 102
National Gallery of Art
and, 28
“Eagle and the Sow, The”
(Tolstoy), 752
economic scarcity, 120-21
Edison, Thomas, 42-43,
48, 57, 58
Edison Medal, 58
effort:
excess of, in pleasing
master, 416-17
saving of, 209, 211
ellortlessness, appearance
of, 245-53
Egypt, 206-7
Eiffel Tower, 94-, 229-30
Eisenhower, Dwight D.,
315, 353
Elba, 63454, 184, 294, 379
El Dorado, 237, 238,
335-37
Elizabeth 1, Queen, 34,
146-47, 148, 149,
213, 364, 406, 427
“Elm~Tree and the Vine,
The” (Dodsleyl: 35
emotions, xz'x—xx
appealing to, 367-75
arguments and, 322
control of, 152, 153,
155, 182, 196,243,
330
defensiveness and, 426
forms and, 424
hiding of, 321
infectiousnes of, 76
money and, 342-43,
344
planning and, 243
playing on, 93
repression of, 329
spectacle and, 316
and stirring up waters to
catch fish, 325-32
as thumbscrews, 271,
273, 281
time and, 295, 296, 297
uncontrollable, 273
Enciso, Francisco Femandez de, 237
end, the, planning all the
way to, 236-4-4
end time, 296, 298-99
enemies:
attention paid to, 300
crushing completely,
107- 14
cultlike following and,
216
former friends, 109
fortresses as protection
from, 130-36
isolating of, 358,
363-64, 366
mirror effect and,
376-91
overreaction to moves
of, 167
reconciliation with, 109,
1 1 l
reputations of, 37, 40,
42
revenge of, 111, 114,
261, 366
self—destruction of, 114-
size of, 428
stirring up anger in,
325-32
syrnpathizing with, 109
using, 8- 15
winning over, 371 -72
energy, saving of, 209, 211
England, 146, 147, 239,
240
Washington and, 154
Ennemoser,_]., 227, 222
Enter action with boldness
(Law 28), 227—35
entrances and exits, 198
envy, 188, 4-00, 4023,
404, 405-6, 407-9
Epicurus, 319
equality, xviii
Erickson, Milton 11.,
212-13, 259, 315,
363
mirroring used by,
386-87
Erie Railroad, 91 -92
Escorial, El, 353
Essays in Idlmess (Kenk‘6),
302-3, 329, 414
Essex, Earl of, 34, 146, 364
Este, Francesco d’, 186
Este, Isabella d’, 150-52
Ethiopia, 25, 288, 327-28
Ethiopian proverb, 167
exotica, 267—-68, 319
Fabius, 53
Fables (Aesop), 96, 140,
233, 237, 335, 367,
370
Fables (Birch), 328
Fablex (Dodsley), 6'5, 296
Fables (La Fontaine), see La
Fontaine, jean de, fa~
bles of
Fable: (Stevenson), 322
Fables (roiswy). 33, 152,
304, 477
fables and folktales:
“The Animals Stricken
with the Plague,”
38-40
“The Ass and the Gar»
dener,” 302
“The Boy and the Nettle,” 233
“The Cat That Walked
By Himself,” 84
“Chelmjustice,” 207
“The Chestnut and the
Fig Tree,” 764
“The Citizen and the
Traveller,” 322
“The Crow and the
Sheep,” 740
“The Crow—Hen, the
Cobra, and the
Jackal," 207-3
“The Dog with the
Cropped Ears,”
420—2 7
“The Eagle and the
Sow,” 752
“The Elm Tree and the
Vine,” 85
“A Fool and a Wise
Man,” 209- 70
“The Fox and the
Grapes,” 307
“The Fox and the
Stork,” 380-87
“The Funeral of the Li~
oness,” 264-65
“The Gentle Art of Persuasion,” 370
“The Goose and the
Horse,” 172-73
“The Greedy Man and
the Envious Man,”
407
“The Indian Bird,”
270- 7 7
“The King, the Sufi, and
the Surgeon,”
233-39
“The Kites, the Crows,
and the Fox," 750-57
“The Liar,” 256-57
“The Lion, the
Chamois, and the
Fox,” 272-73
“The Man and His
Shadow,” 3015
“The Man “Who Loved
Money Better Than
Life,” 337-38
“The Merchant and His
Friend,” 377- 79
“The Miser,” 335
“The Monkey and the
Cat,” 206- 7
“The Monkey and the
Peas," 304
“The Monkey and the
Wasp,” 328
“The Owl Who Was
God,” 277-79
“The Nut and the Campanile,” 77
“The Peasant and the
Apple Tree,” .96
“The Power of a Lie,”
223-24
“The Price of Envy,"
753-54
“The Snake, the
Farmer, and the
Heron,” 70
“The Tortoise, the Elephant, and the Hip
popotamus,” 57-58
“The Trout and the
Gudgeon," 2.96
“The Two Adventurers,” 228-29
“The Two Dogs,”
779-80
“The Two Frogs,” 237
“The Two Horses,” 5'3
“The Vainglm-ious
Cockerel,” 477
“The Virtues ofthe
Cock,” 717
“The Wasp and the
Prince,” 45
“When the Waters Were
Changed,” 379-20
“The Wolves and the
Sheep,” 367
Fablesfrom Eoccaaio and
Chauczr (Aikin),
172- 73
Fabl&¢(Kri1off), 773-50,
272-73. 306
facial expression, 28
Fadiman, Cliflon, 32, 765,
255, 258, 307
Faem 5
Faliscans, 93
fall of the favorite, 205
false sincerity, 17, 21-22, 30
familiarity, 123
fantasies, playing to,
263-70
Fan Tseng, 108-9
fates, intertwining of, 86
father, image of, 355
father figures:
hostility“ toward, 352
stepping into shoes of,
347-57
favors, 346
asking for, 181, 187, 417
granting of, 210, 211
fear, 296
boldness and, 228
other people‘s, vs. their
love, 87
Ferdinand, King, 303
Ferrara, 150, 151
fights, being drawn into,
150-54
Fischer, Bobby, 124-26
“Fla.me—Colored Cloak,
The” (Herodotus),
347-43
flattery, 180
Flaubert, Gustave, 195
Flemish Iowlarids, 146
flexibility, 244, 2597, 4'25,
427
flock of famed sheep,
image of, 365
Florence, I50, 152, 341,
342, 361, 398, 403-4
Blacks and Whites in,
361-62
fluidity, 419-30
following, creation of,
215-26
“Fool and a Wise Man, A"
(La Fontaine),
209- 70
forced time, 296, 297-98
forces;
concentrating of, 171-77
dispersion of, 176-77
Ford, Gerald, 149
Ford, Henry, 142--43
foreign cultures, imitation
of, 319
Foreman, George, 129
forgiveness, 2l4
Forman, Simon, 146
formlessness, 419-30
Formosa, 267-68
forms, 424-25
forlress, image of, 136
fortresses, 130-36
fortunate people, associav
tion with, 76, 81
Fouché,_]oseph, 13,
292-95, 326, 327
Napo1eon‘s spying on,
379-80
Fouquet, Nicolas, 2, 3, 5
“Fox and the Grapes,
The” {La Fontaine),
307
“Fox and the Stork, The”
(La Fontaine},
3:90-87
France, 146, 147, 150, 151,
239, 240, 241
Fronde in, 133, 315
1848 elections in, 242
July Revolution in, 154
Revolution in, 292, 349,
369, 380, 399
Rothschild and, 174,
262, 283, 340-41
Washington and, 154
Francesco, Greta de, .90,
220-22, 225
Francis I, King, 311, 340
Francis II, King, 277
Franklin, Benjamin, 220
Frazer, James George,
203
Frederick 11 “the Great,”
King, 374
Frederick William IV,
King, 19-20, 84, 85
INDEX 439
440 INDEX
freedom, 82, 167, 258, 262
of expression, 321
free lunch, 333-46
Freud, Sigmund, 272, 298,
353, 3:93
Frick, Henry, 103
fn’end{s):
fonner, now enemies,
109
posing as, while working as spy, 101-6
scapegoating of, 205
trusdng of, 8-15 \
friendliness, with master,
I81
friendship, dependence
vs, 87
Fronde, the, 133, 315
“Funeral of the Lioness,
The” (La Fontaine),
264-65
Fm-ey,]oe, 140-41
Fushimiya, 343-44-
future, 241, 295, 296
gadfly, 324
Gaetani, Cardinal (Boniface VIII), 361~62
Gainsborough, Thomas,
278-79
Galileo, 3-4, 175, 319, 398
gaps, 228
Garbo, Greta, 121
garden ofweeds, image of,
408
Geezil, Sam, 23-25, 27
generosity, 333, 334, 344
in disarming victim,
89-94
indiscriminate, 335
of others, appealing to,
98
strategic, 341, 342
Genghis Khan, 99
“Gentle Art of Persuasion,
The“ (Aesop). 370
Germany, 239, 240, 241
attacks on Landon, 106
Treaty of Versailles and,
114
gestures, as indication of
weaknesses, 272
Get others to do the work
for you, but always
take the credit (Law
7), 56-61
Gliiberti, Lorenzo, 67
gifts, 92, 334, 340, 343,
344
to patrons, 288~89
Gilbert, Marie (Lola Mon—
tez), 55, 77-79, 235,
390-4)]
Giovane,Pa1ma, 46
Giovio, Paolo, 109
giving before you take. 91,
92, 288, 334
Glass Menagerie, The
(Williams), 355
go iwei»-931:), 363, 423-24,
426
goal:
concentration on, 175
disguising of, 212
stopping after reaching,
410-13
“God and Abraharn” (Hz:
Subtle Ruse: The Book
afxlrabic Wzlrdom and
Guile), 73-74
gods, Greek, 241, 243
gods on Mount Olympus,
image of, 243
Godunov, Boris, 407
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang
Von, xix, 773, 222,
374
Golden Bough, The (Frazer),
203
Golder: Dream, 17w: Seekers
afEt Darado (Chapman), 738-40
Goldwyn, Samuel, 32
Gonzaga, Gianfrancesco,
150, 151
goodwill gestures. 373
“Goose and the Horse,
The” (fable), 172— 73
Gordian knot, 351
Gordon-Gordon, john,
Lord Uohn Crowningsfield), 92
Co~Saiin, Empemr, 306-7
Gossaert, jan, 47
Goujian, King, 168
Gould, jay, 28429, 91-92
governing, flexibility in,
427
Gracién, Baltasar, xxii, 19,
72, 314, 378
on absence and pres~
ence, 121
on being first, 348
on being kinglike, 289
on being seen, 49
on committing to oth~
ers, 757, 155
on concealing abilities,
249
on conoealing mistakes,
205
on contempt, 308
on disagreement with
the many, 378
on doing things yourself
vs. using third parties, 213
on envy, 403, 409, 40.9
on fear of failure, 230
on finding the thumbscrew, 281
on intensity and extensity, 176
on letting things be, 305
on misfortunes of others, 81
on mystery, 54
on others‘ dependence,
88
on outxhining the mas
ter, 7
on role~playing, 198
on self—tespect, 283
on stepping into a great
man’s shoes, 356
on using enemies, 15
on using others’ knowl
edge, 60
on using stupidity, 161
Graham, James, 22042
grandeur, 338
Grant, Ulysses S., 366
gratitude ofothers, a.ppea.l—
ing to, 95-100
great men, stepping into
shoes of, 347»-57
Greece, 241, 318, 319, 350,
351, 381, 420, 428
greed, 334, 337, 346
“Greedy Man and the Err
vious Man, The”
(Jewish parable),
407
Greek sea-god Proteus,
image of, 198
Greeley, Horace, 157
Gross, George, 24-25
Gngsa, Rae, 328~29
Guicciaxdini, Francesco,
321
guilt, extexiorizing of,
2034
Guise family, 214
half a. heart, going halfway
with, 228
Halliwell, Kenneth, 401-2,
408
hallucinatory effect, 379
Hamlet (Shakespeare), 54,
353
Han Dynasty, 10, 183, 201
Han~fei~tzu, 36, 58, 94,
128, 131, 344, 375,
396, 423
Han Kao-tsu (Liu Pang),
108-10
Hannibal, 53-54
Hanno the elephant, 232
happy people, association
with, 76, 80
“Hare and the Tree, The”
(Han«fei-tzu), 423
Haxpending, Asbury.
157-58, 159
Haxfzell, Oscar, 268
Ha Tae—hung, 230-32
hawk, image of, 299
He-aid, George Trafford, 78
hearts and minds of others, working on,
367-75
Hechigwan, Sakamotoya,
373
Hechigwan, Yamashina,
387~—88
Heihachiro, Togo, 65
Helen ufTmy, 92493
help, asking for, 95~ 100
Henri II, King, .9, 277, 278,
31142
Henry VIII, King, 303-4,
393~94
Hercules, 352
Herodotus, 72-73, 238,
285-87, 341-43,
368-69, 428
hesitation, boldness compared with, 228-29
Heth, joice, 46
Hibbert, Christopher, 382
Hideyoshi, Emperor, 5,
210, 246, 296, 313,
416
Hiero, King, 13
“Hippocleides at Sicyon”
(Herodotus), 285-87
Hispanic Monarchy, flu
(Campanella), 320
Histories, 1v'7zs(HetodoI11s),
72-73, 285-37,
341-43, 358-69
Hitler, Adolf, 165, 166
Holbein, Hans, 3394
Holland, 99
Hollywood (Kanin), 273w 74
Hollywood, House UnAmerican Activities
Committee and,
86-87, 165-67,
197-98, 322-23
honesty, xviii, 20-21, 22,
183
selective, in disarming
victim, 89-94
honeyed bear trap, image
of, 67
honor, using absence to
increase, H5-22
Hoover, Herbert, 197
Hoover, _]. Edgar, 87
hopelessly insecure man,
dealing with, 138
horns ofthe bull, image
of, 261
Houdini, Harry, 197,
247-50, 252, 298,
330
House ofMedia’, Tlw: IL: Rise
andFall(Hibbert),
382
House Un-American Ac»
livities Committee,
86-87, 165-67,
197-98, 322-23
Howe, Louis, 204
“How to Broadcast News"
(Ike Subtle Ruse: The
Back afArabic Wisdom
and Guile), 208-9
Hsiang Yu, 108-I0
Hsien, Duke, 94
Hsing, l53
Hoax), 153
Hugo, Victor, 374
Hnguenots, 214, 275
Huh Saeng, 230-32
Huizinga, Johan, 37 7- 72
Hull, Fax, 78
Hume, David, 266
Humphrey, Hubert, 149
Hundred Days, the, 197
Hungary, 297
hunter, image of, 144
Huntington, Arabella,
278-79
Huntington, Collis P., 278
hurrying, 291, 296,
297-98
Hyperbolus, 360
Icams falling from the sky,
image of, 417
ideas, unconventional,
317—24
identify, new, 191-99
Ieyasu, Tokugawa, Emperor, 99, 246, 266,
296
ignoring things you cannot
have, 300-308
illusions, 251
images, 309, 313, 314-16,
374
in creating cult, 217-18
symbols and, 314-15
impatience, 296
Inalchik, 139
Incas, 59, 238, 239, 335.
359-60, 365
incense~smel|.ing competi»
(ion, 344-45
income, disguising source
of, 218
independence, 82, 85, 88,
145, 154, 155, 175
reputation for, 148
lnd1‘ana(Sand), 194
“Indian Bird, The" (Shah),
210~ 7 1
Indian fables:
“The Ass and the Car»
dener,‘ 302
“The Kites, the Crows,
and the Fox,” 150-51
“The Merchant and His
Friend,” 37.7~»7.9
“The Wasp and the
Prince,” 45
Infection: avoid the unhappy and unlucky
(Law 10), 76-81
inferiority, feclixigs of,
405
infomiationz
false. giving of, 106
INDEX 441
442: INDEX
information (cant)
gathering of, 101, 106,
143
isolalion and, 130
infuriating enemies with
the mjrmr effect,
376-91
innocence, xix
Innocent, Pope, .3 82
innocent goat, image ofl
205
innovation, 392, 398, 399
Inquisition, 219, 220,
319-20, 322
insecurity, 55, 138, 141, 143
arrogance and, 287
as thumbscrew, 271
instincts, 143
insulting others, 142, 143,
159, 189
intelligence:
downplaydng of, 156-62
showing of, 161
intentions, concealment
of, 16-30
cat’s—paw and, 209, 212
intimacy, with master, 181
Isazvason, Walter, 33
Isabella, Queen, 286, 303
Isabey, Jean—Baptiste,
184-85
Iskandar, Kai Ka’us ihn, 7.9
isolation, 136, 364-65
danger of, 130—36
of enemies, 358,
363-64, 366
Israelis, 73
Italy, 150, 151, 152, 320
condnttim’ in, 83, 700- 70
Inquisition in, 219, 220,
319-20
Romagna, 202-3
Ivan IV “the Terrible,”
Czar, 230, 231, 233,
235, 384-86, 407
withdrawal of, 255-56,
258, 261
Jackson, Stonewall, 127
Jacobins, 292, 293, 380
Jami, Mulla, 119
Janin, Louis, 158
Janus, xx
Japan:
China invaded by, 14,
112, 208-9, 422
foreign cultures and,
168, 428
Holland and, 99
incense-smelling competition in, 344-45
Portugal and, 99
Russia and, 65-66
japanm Art of Wizr, 17w
(Cleaiy), 25
Japanese tea ceremony
(Cha—no-yu), 5, 209,
210, 246, 306, 373,
326, 343, 344, 388
Javiac, Guillelrna de,
1 16-17
jaws of ingratitude, image
of, 15
Jehu, King, 23-24
Jesus Christ, 169, 220,
323, 387, 3.93, 3.94
Jewish parable, 407
Jews, 322, 393
Joio II, King, 285
Johnson, Andrew, 366
Johnson, Lyndon B., 324
Johnson, Samuel, 133
Jake, 77ze(Kundera), 168
jokes, about appearances
or tastes, 181, 185,
186, 189
Jones, Ernest, 352-53
Joseph, and coat of many
colors, 406
Joseph 11, King, 356~57
Julius 11, Pope, 86, 151,
175, 406, 407, 409
_/ulius Cac5a1(Sha.kespeare), 79, 299
July Revolution, 154
Jupiter, moons ofl 3-4
justice, appeals to, 96-97
Just So Stories (Kiplin ),
04
_
Kanin, Garson, 273-74
Kao Tsung, 110
Kautilya, xix, 103, 703,
110, 211
Kean, Charles John, 55
Keep others in suspended
terror: cultivate an
air of unpredictability (Law 17), 123-29
Keep your hands clean
(Law 26), 200-214
Kenko, 302-3, 329, 474
Kennedy, John F., 305,
353
Ketel, Comelis, 46
keyhole, image of, 374
Khaldiin, ibn, 334-35
Khan, Genghis, 139-40
Khrushchev, Nikita, 73
Kierkegaard, Soren, 30,
407, 403, 406
kindness, selective, 91, 93
kinds of people, 137-44
king, 363, 426
acting like, 282-90
hostility toward, 352
“King, the Sufi, and the
Surgeon, The”
(Shah), 238-39
Kipling, Rudyard, 84
Kisiinger (Isaacson), 33
Kissinger, Henry:
boldness of, 234
China and, 61, 149
Humphrey and, 149
indispensability of, 87
in Israeli negotiations,
73
kidnapping attempt
and, 13
Lord’s report and,
32-33
Nixon and, 61, 87,
148-49, 259, 306
options controlled by,
259
Pentagon Papers and,
306
reputation of, 41—42
smoke screen and, 28
Soviet Union and, 149
“Kites, the Crows, and the
Fox, The” (Indian
fable), 750-57
Kleppini, 24-8-50, 330
knowledge:
from the past, using,
59-60
specialized, having appearance of, 86
Know who you’re dealing
with—do not offend
the wrong person
(Law 19), 137—44
Koller, General, 64
Kriloff, Ivan, 779-80,
272-73, 306
Kundera, Milan, 168
Kurbski, Andrey, 255
La Bruy‘ere,jean de, 100,
126, 182
Lacan, Jacques, 298
La Fontaine,jea.n de, fables of:
“The Animals Stricken
with the Plague,“
38-40
“The Camel and the
Floating Sticks," 776
“The Dog with the
Cropped Ears,”
420-27
“A Fool and a Wise
Man,” 2 09~ 10
“The Fox and the
Grapes,” 301
“The Fox and the
Stork,”.390—87
“The Funeral of the Uoness,” 264-55
“The Monkey and the
Cat,” 206-7
“The Two Adventurers,” 228-29
language, changing to fit
different people, 180
La Rochefoucauld,
Frangois de, 18, 257,
402
an absence, 117
spying tip from, 104
Lauzun, Due de, 48
Law 1: Never outshine the
master, 1-7
Law 2: Never put too
much trust in friends,
learn how to use enemies, 8-15
Law 3: Conceal your in~
tentions, 16-30
Law 4: Always say less
than necessary,
31 -36
Law 5: So much depends
on reputafion-guard
it with your life,
37«-43
Law 6: Court attention at
all cost, 44-55
Law 7: Gel others to do
the work for you, but
always take the
credit, 56-61
Law 8: Make other people
come to you-use
bait ifnecessary,
62-68
Law 9: Win through your
actions, never
through argument,
69-75
Law 10: Infection: avoid
the unhappy and unlucky, 7G~—81
Law 11: Learn to keep
people dependent on
you, 82-33
Law 12: Use selective honesty and generosity
to disarm your victim, 89-94
Law 13: When asking for
help, appeal to people’s self-interest,
never to fheir mercy
or gratitude, 95-100
Law 14: Pose as a friend,
work as a
spy, 101-6
Law 15: Crush your
enemy Dolally,
107-14
law 16: Use absence to in
crease respect and
honor, 115-22
Law 17: Keep others in
suspended terror:
cultivate an air of unpredictability,
123-29
Law 18: Do not build
fortresses to protect
yourself-—isolation is
dangerous, 130-—36
Law 19: Know who you‘re
dealing wiih—do not
offend the wrong
person, 137-v44
Law 20: Do not commit to
anyone, 145-55
Law 21: Play a sucker to
catch a sucker——seern
dumber than your
mark 156-52
Law 22: Use the surrender
tactic: transform
weakness into
power, 163-70
Law 23: Concentrate your
forces, 171-77
Law '24: Play the perfect
courfier, 178-90
Law 25: Re-create your-—
self, 191-99
Law 26: Keep your hands
clean, 200-214
Law 27: Play on people‘s
need to believe to
create in cultlike following, 215-26
Law 28: Enter action with
boldness, 227-35
Law 29: Plan all the way
to the end, 23644
Law 30: Make your accomplishments seem
effortless, 245-53
Law 31: Control the options: get others to
play with the cards
you deal, 254-62
Law 32: Play to people’s
fantasies, 263-70
Law 33: Discover each
man’s thumbscrew,
271-81
Law 34: Be royal in your
own fashion: act like
a king to be treated
like one, 282-90
Law 35: Master the art of
timing, 291-99
Law 36: Disdain things
you cannot have: ignoring them is the
best revenge,
300-1308
Law 37: Create compelling spectacles,
309-16
Law 38: Think as you like
but behave like others, 317-24
Law 39: Stir up waters to
catch fish, 325—32
Law 40: Despise the free
lunch, 333-46
Law 41: Avoid stepping
into a great rnan‘s
shoes, 347-57
Law 42: Strike the shepherd and the sheep
will scatter, 358—ii6
Law 43: Work on the
hearts and minds of
others, 367-75
INDEX 443
444 INDEX
Law 44: Disarm and infuriate with the mirror
eflect, 376-91
Law 45: Preach the need
for change, but never
reform too much at
once, 392-99
Law 46: Never appear too
perfect, 400-409
Law 47: Do not go past
the mark you aimed
for: in victory, learn
when to stop, 410-18
Law 48: Assume formless—
ness, 419-30
Lawrence, T. E., 372, 373,
425-26
Lawrence, Thomas, 188
Lawson, John, 86-87
Lazar, Irving, 273-74
Learn to keep people de
pendent on you
(Law 11), 82-88
leaving things alone, 300
Lenclos, Anne de (Ninon
de Lenclos), 17-18,
29, 119, 233-34,
255-58
system of, 257-58
Leo X, Pope, 46‘, 232
Leonardo da Vinci, 33,
151, 177, 342
“The Chestnut and the
Fig Tree,” 764
“The Nut and the Campanile,” 77
“Liar, The” (Armenian
folktale), 256-57
Liberius, Pope, 394
Lieh Tzu, 294-95
lies, 321
as bodyguard, 106
boldness and, 228
verbal argument and,
74
Lif, Lztterr, andEpicurean
Philosophy afNinon de
Lenclos (Lenclos) ,
233-34
Life ofAlexande1 the Great,
Tht (Plutarch),
377- 72
Lzfe t_;fAntany (Plutarch),
370- 77
Life oflulius Caesar, The
(Plutarch), 278-7.9
Lifé ofPm‘cle.s, 77w
(Plutarch), 349-50
Lifé ofScrtoriu: (Plutarch),
292-94
Life qf7hemirtocles, Yhe
(Plumrch), 362
limelight, image of, 49
Lincoln, Abraham, 12, 13,
366
character of, 196-97,
270
Lind, jenny, 42
Lin Piao, 396
“Lion, the Chamois, and
the Fox, The”
(Kiiloff), 272-73
lion and the hate, image
Of, 234
lions circle the hesitant
prey, 228
Lippi, Fra Filippo, 187, 314
Liszt, Franz, 55, 194
Lithuania, 255
Little, Brown Book ofAnecdates, T7w(Fadi.man,
ed.), 32, 765, 255,
258, 307
Liu, King, 11
Liu Pang (Han Kan-tsu),
108- 10
Lives afthe Artists (Vasari),
350-57
Loller, Herman, 275-77
London, Nazi attacks on,
106
Long March, 112, 208,
422
long time, 295, 296-97
Lorca, Ramiro de, 709
Lord, Winston, 32-33
Lorris, Guillaume de, 345
Louis, Joe, 68
Louis XI, King, 85-86
Louis XII, King, 150-51
Louis XIII, King, 160, 176,
273-75
LauisX(V(Bertrand), 33
Louis XIV, King, .9, 180,
184, 242, 305, 348,
349, 353, 374
as center of activity,
132-33, 134
Due de Lauzun and, 48
Fouquet and, 2-3, 5
generosity of, 342-43
Mancini and, 383-84
as Sun King, 313, 314,
315, 348, 349, 384
tacitumity of, 33-34, 33
Louis XV, King, 348-50,
355, 368, 413-14
Louis XVI, King, 190,
224, 279, 280, 292,
294, 349, 368, 869,
399, 429
Louis XVIII, King, 294,
379, 426
Louis«Philippe, King,
283-84, 287, 426
love, xx
other people’s, vs. their
fear, 87
Luce, Henry, 188-89
Lucca, 153
luck, 415-16
Ludwig, King, 55, 77-78,
390—J1
Ludwig Witzgm:tein.‘A
Memoir (Malcolm),
383
Lustig, Victor, 91, 234,
288
air of mystery surrounding, 52
Capone and, 90-91
Eiffel Tower scheme of,
94, 229-30
Loller and, 275-77
money-copying machine of, 74-75,
276-77
MacArthur, Douglas, 354
Macbeth (Shakespeare), 55
McClellan, George, 127,
157
Machiavelli, Niccolo, xvii’,
xx, xxiii, 77, 87, 70.9,
136, 179, 202, 298,
320, 350, 366, 415,
418
on annihilating the
enemy, 113
on choice, 261
on Cosimo de‘ Medici,
404
on deception, 220
on dependence, 85
on fortresses, 133, 136
on going beyond the
mark, 417
on hiding the truth, 321
on impetuousness vs.
caution, 234
on necessity, 349
on the overreaching
general. 412- 13
on reform, 396, 397,
399
on spectacle, 316
Voltaire on, 322
magicians. 298
magnet, image of, 225
magnetism, animal,
223-24
Mahabharata, 77-72
Make other people come
to you-use bait if
necessary (Law 8),
62-68
Make your accomplishments seem effortless
(Law 30), 245-53
Malcolm, Norman, 383
Mamugni (ll Bragadino),
264-66, 267, 270
“Man and His Shadow,
The” (Kriloff), 306
Manchuria, 422-23
Mancini, Baroness,
382-83
Mancini, Marie, 383-84
Manfredi, Astorre, Prince,
5
manipulation, 66
Mansart,_]ules, 184
Mantua, 150, 151, 152
Mantua, Duke of, 264,
266, 288-89, 339-40
“Man Who Loved Money
Better Than Life,
The” (Chinese fable),
3.37-38
Mao Tse-tung, 14, 53, 113,
176, 197, 353, 424,
430
father of, 354-55
isolation of enemies by,
3164
Lin Piao and, 396
Nationalism and, 112,
208-9, 422-23, 424,
430
past and, 394-96
public emotions and,
373
scapegoars and, 204
we!-chi and, 424, 426
Marconi, Guglielmo, 57
Maxie, Filippo, 126-27
Maria. Theresa, Empress,
356-57
Maiie—Anlninetlc, 224,
368-69, 399, 429
Maria de’ Médicis, 273-74
maritime warfare, 425
Marlborough, Duchess of,
337-38
Marlborough, Duke of, ‘ll,
337-38
Marranos, 322
martial arts, 420
martyrdom, 170, 204, 321
Mary Queen ofScots, 147
Masamune, Date, 246-47,
345
Masayoshi, Hotta, 168
Marque aftlzc RedDeath,
The (Poe), 131-33
masquerading as a swine
to kill the tiger, 160
Massacre ofSt.
Bartholomew's Eve.
214
Massagetai, 411-12
masser(s):
friendliness with, 181
making a of your
talent to, 187
outshining of, 1-7
proving dedication to,
with excess of effort,
416- 17
two, satisfying of, 185
Master the art of timing
(Law 35), 291-99
Mata Han’, 50-51, 52, 55,
268
Matsumoto, Michihiro,
336
Maurer, Christopher, 348
Mayer, Louis B., 32
Maria, Jules, 2, 383
Medea, 118-19
Medici, Cosimo I de’, 3, 4,
134-35
Medici, Cosimo II de‘, 4
Medici, Cosimo tie’ (the
Elder), 341, 398,
403-4, 405, 408
Medici, Giovanni de’, 403
Medici, Lorenzo de’,
341-42
Pope Innocent and, 382
Medici family, 3-4, 175,
340, 341, 398, 403-4
Médicis, Catherine de’,
214, 277-78
Médicis, Marie de’, 273-74
Medusa, 377
Meegeren, Han van,
268-69
meetings, territory and, 66
Mehmed the Conqueror,
297
Mellon, Andrew, 28, 102
Melos, 164-65, 167
Melville, Herrnan, 408
Memoirs (Casanova), 7.92
Menelik II, King, 288
Menghuo, King, 370-71
Mminas, Las (Velazquez),
196
mercenary soldiers (condo!-
mm’), 83, 103- 10
“Merchant and His
Friend, The” (Indian
fable), 377-79
Mercury, 425
image of, 430
mercy ofothers, appealing
#0, 95-100
mermaid, 46
Mesmer, Franz, 223-25
Mztamorplwm (Ovid),
402-4
metaphors, 387
Mettemich, Klemens Von,
64, 380
Mexico, 301-2
Michael III, Emperor,
9-10, 13
Michelangelo, 71-72, 86,
'87, 175, 251, 342,
406-3, 409
Michelozzo, 404
Milan, 150, 151, 152, 219
mimicry, 377, 378, 379
minds and hearts ofoth
ers, working on,
367-7'5
mine full of diamonds and
rubies, image of, 43
Minerva, 402-4
mirrored situations, danger of, 390-91
mirror eifect, 376-91
Mirrorfiir Princes, A (lskandar), 7.9
“Miser, The” (Aesop), 335
INDEX ‘4145
446, INDEX
misfortune, 76, 81
rnistakes:
audacity and, 227
concealing of, by use of
scapegoat, 201-5,
214
fixing of, 300, .306
indifference to, 307
taking blame for, 214
M1‘thras, 394
Mi Tzu-hsia, 41
Moctezuma, King, 365
Moliére, 2, 18, 257
money, 333-46
circulation of. 34-0
emotions and, 342-43,
344
Mongols, 99
“Monkey and the Cat,
The” (La Fontaine),
206-7
“Monkey and the Peas,
The” (Tolstoy), 304
“Monkey and the Wasp,
The” (Bitch), 328
monopolies, 88, 259
Montaigne, 78, 243
Montez, Lola, 55, 7749,
235. 390-91
moon, image of, 2699
Moon Doctor of Berlin
(Dr. Weisleder),
310-11, 313
moral effect, ofmirror,
378-79
Morgan, J. Pierpont, 57,
88, 175, 25:9
Morphy, Paul, 352-53
Moses, 112, 352
Pharaoh and, 338-40
Mountain Doctor, the
(Michael Schi.ip~
pach), 221 -23
Mrazek, James, 424
Mr. Suspicion, dealing
with, 138
Mucianus, Publius Crassus
Dives, 70
Muhammad, Shah of
Khwamzm, 139-40
Mullc, Nizam al-, .338-40
Muqatldimalz, 17::
(Khaldiin), 334-35
Musashi, Miyamoto, 78,
37.9
Mussel, Alfred de, 194
Mussolini, Benito, 87
mystery, 50, 52~53, 54,
55, 212, 252
nziiveté, xv:'ii—xix
Napoleon I, Emperor,
xviii, l3, 22, 58, 770,
I12, 174-75, H97,
251, 283, 234,
293434, 295, 356,
377, 374, 399, 415,
429
boar hunt and, 189-90
boldness of, 233
charazt/er of, 81
Fouché spied on by,
379-80
imprisonment and escape from Elba,
63-64, 65, 66, 184,
294, 379
and power of absence.
I20
Taileymnd and Fouché’s
conspiracy against,
13, 293~94, 326-27,
330
at Waterloo, 63, 294,
327
Napoleon III, Ernperor,
174, 240, 356, 374
Narcissus efiect, 378
Narvéez, Ramon Maria,
1 1 1
National Gallery ofArt
(Washington, D.C.),
28, 102
nature, 222-23, 247, 250
Nazis, 106, 315
negotiation, 112
boldness in, 233~34
territory and, 66
Neoptolemus, 93
New Zfirchar Zeitung
(Rischke), 3.9.7—.94
neutralizing effect, of mirv
ror, 377~78
Never appear too perfect
(Law 46), 400409
Never outshine the master
(Law 1), 1-7
Never put too much trust
in friends, learn how
to use enemies (Law
2), 8-15
Newton, Isaac, fi0
New Ybrk Times, 306
Nay, Marshal, 63
Nicholas I, Czar, 35
Nicholas II, Czar, 364
Nicias, 360
Nietzsche, Friedrich, xviii,
xxi, 40
on belief in oneself, 237
on founding a
religion,
220
system of, 257-58
Nixon, Richard:
China visit (it 61
Kissinger and, 61, 87,
148-49, 259, 306
Pentagon Papers and,
306
noble gesture, 28
Nobunaga, Oda, 416
nonchalance, 180
Noifleet, J. Frank, 140-41
notice, I80
notoriety. 45
“Nut and the Campanile,
The” (Leonardo), 77
oak tree, image of, 169
Obolensky, Ivan, 231
Odysseus, xx, 93, 241
Oedipus, 203
offending the wrong person, 137-44
old people vs. young, 353,
357
Old Testament, 23-24
On Wizr (Clausewitz), 174-
opossum, image of, 161
opponents:
typology of, 138-39
sec alro enemies
options, controlling of,
254~«62
forms of, 259-61
Oracle at Delphi, image
ofi 36
orchestration of evens, I97
originality, 317
Orleans, Duke of, 260
Orton,_]oe, 401-2, 408
ostentaiion, avoiding,
179-80
astmlca, 359
other people:
appealing to self—interest
of, 95400, 372,
373-74
becoming focal point of
their need to believe,
2l5—26
behaving like, while
thinking as you like,
317-24
comrnitrnent to, 145-55
discovering thumbscrews of, 2”/‘l—8l
insulting, 142, 143, 159,
189
keeping them dependent on you, 82-88
keeping them in suspended terror,
123-29
making them come to
you, 62438
playing to their fantasies, 263-70
types of, 13744
unhappy and unlucky,
avoidance of, 76—8l
using work of, 56451
working on hearts and
minds of, 367-75
overacling, 198
overstepping your bounds,
186
Ovid, 379, 402~4
“Owl Who Was God,
The” (Thurber),
277» 79
Pacific Ocean, discovery
of, 238, 239
Panama, 237
Panchatantra, tale from,
207-8
parables, see fables and
folktales
fixc aux Cerfs, 34-S, 414
parents, stepping into
shoes of, 34767
Paris, liberation of, 315
past:
reinterpretation of, 397
support for values of,
397-98
using knowledge from,
59»-(50
patience, xxx‘, 29], 295,
298
patrons, 86, 175, 2.51, 342
Aretino and, 33840
gifts to, 28?»-89
patterns, 28, 126, 128, 129,
415, 416
Pausanias, 3l8~—19, 323
pawns, 367, 373
paying full price, 333, 334,
344, 346
paying your own way,
333, 346
pearls before swine, laying
of, 321, 3'23
“Peasant and the Apple
Tree, The” (Aesop),
96
Pedrari-as (Pedro Arias
Dévila), 238, 239
Peloponnesian War, 97,
164, 241
Peluponnexian War, 27w
(Thueydides), 98
Pentagon Papers, 306
people, see other people
perfection, appearance of,
400-409
Pergamus, 70
Pericles, 349-50, 354,
359-60, 416
Perseus, 377, 390
Pershing, john _]., 301, 302
Persia, 148, 318-19, 351,
359, 381, 382,
411-12, 420, 428
personality, 195
perspective:
anger and, 329450
isolation and, 136
persuasion, 73
working on the hearix
and minds ofothers,
3627-75
Peru, 335, 359-60
Perugino, Pietro, 350-5?
Peter 11, Emperor, 427
Pelit Trianon, 368
Petrucci, Pandolfo, 77
pettiness, 338
Philip, King ofMacedu
nia, 350-52, 416
Philip I], King ofSpain,
353
Philippines, 354
philosophefs stone, 219,
220
Phoenicia, 331
Picasso, Pablo, 4-841%,
127-28, 149, 355
pickpockets, 66
Pisa, 342
Pistoia, 153
Pizano, Francisco, 59.
238, 335-36,
359-60, 365
Pizarro, Gonzalo, 336
placaulng others, 188
plain, unassuming. and
often unintelligent
man, dealing with,
13&3§
Plan all the way to the end
(Law 29), 236-44»
Planck, Max, 398
planning, 212, 419
to the end, 236-44
flexibility in, 244
and learning when to
stop, 410-18
Play a sucker to catch a
sucker—seem
dumber than your
mark (Law 21),
155-62
Play on people’s need to
believe to create a
cultlike following
(Law 27), 215-26
Play the perfect courtier
(Law 24), 178-90
Play to people’s fantasies
(Law 32), 263-70
pleasure, being a source
of, 182
Pluiarch, 73, 60, 278-7.9,
292-94, 310-17,
349-50, 362, 377- 72,
405
Hmizt Mimirfir Hmws, 21
(Gmcizin), 348
Poe, Edgar Allan, l3l~33,
38?‘
Poggio, Stefano di, 96-97
Poggio farnily, 96, 9?
Poland, 255
polio vaccine, 322
politeness, 180
politics, abstraction in,
425
Pompadour, Madame de
Qearme Poisson),
348, 413-14, 415
Pompey, 192, 278-79
pond of fish, image of, 331
Pontormo,_]ax:opo da, 135,
252
INDEX few
-248 INDEX
Portugal, 99
Pose as a friend, work as a
spy (Law 14), 101-6
potlatch feasts, 341
“Power of a Lie, The”
Uewish folktale),
223-24
Power ofthe C/zarlatan, 77:3
(Francesco), .90,
220-22
praise, 405, 408
Preach the need for
change, but never reform too much at
once (Law 45),
392-99
predecessors, stepping
into shoes of, 347-57
predictability, 123, 125,
129, 429
Prescott, William I-1.,
359-60
presence, 117, 119-20, 121,
364
boldness and, 228-29
spectacles and, 309
prey, hesitant, 228
price, setting your own,
289
“Price ofEnvy, The” (jewish folktale), 753-54
Prince, 77w (Machiavelli),
xxiii, 136, 202
Problem ofPaulMorphy, The
(Jones), 352-53
problems, petty, 300
“Prodigy Ox, The”
(Kenko), 302-3
proportion, loss of, I35
protection, 177, 421, 422
fortresses for, 130-36
Protestantism, 393~94,
398
Protestant Reformation,
3 19
Proteus, image of, 198
proud and arrogant man,
dealing with, 138
Prussia, 160, 239-41
Psalmanazar, George,
267-68
Ptolemy XII, 206
Ptolemy XIII, 206, 207
Ptolemy XIV, 207
Punitive Expedition,
301-3
“Purloined Letter, The”
(Poe), 387
purpose, single-minded
ness of, 175, 177
Pynchon, Thomas, 120
queen, 426-27
racehorse, image of, 252
Raleigh, Walter, 34, 146,
213, 379, 364, 406
Ralston, William, 157, 158,
159
Raphael, 232
Rasputin, 364
reality(ies), 263
oppressive, fantasies
From, 266-69
Rechberg, Otto Von, 77
Re-create yourself (Law
25), 191-99
red herrings, 17, 21, 28, 30
reform, 392-99
Reformation, 319
Reich, Wilhelm, 425
religion, 215, 216, 342
borrowing forms of, 218
reputation, 37-43
for deception and dishonesty, 30, 42
for independence, 148
and keeping your hands
clean, 200-214
and scapegoat for taking blame, 201-5,
214
respect, using absence to
increase, 115-22
Retz, Cardinal de, 34, 165,
232, 242, 260, 406-7
the Froncle and, 315
revenge, of enemies, 111,
114, 261, 366
revolution, 397, 398
rhythms, 415, 416
Richelieu, Cardinal, 18,
175~76, 241, 273-75
plot against, 204
rigidity, 429
Rikyu, Sen no, 5-0, 209,
210, 245, 247,
387-88
Rischke, Anne~Susanne,
3.93-94
rivals, rel enemies
river, image of, 345
robber barons, 42, 66, 142
Robert-Houdin, _]ean-Eugene, 298
Robespierre, Maximilienr
Francois-Marie
Isidore de, 284,
292-93, 295
Rockefeller, john D., 88,
259, 298
Rockefeller, Nelson, 148
Rodriguez, joio, 428
roles, 191, 195
Romagna, 202-3
romance, 263
Romance aftlze Rose, The
(Lorris), 345
Roman empire, 172
Rome, 150, 152, 192, 393,
397
Faliscans and, 93
I-Iannibal’s march on,
53-54
theater in, 192-93
Rommel, Erwin, 41, 424
Ronsard, Pierre de, 312
Roosevelt, Franklin D., 28,
197, 305, 323
dog of, 305-6
Howe and, 204-
image of, 204, 284
Rosenberg, Paul, 127—28
Rothschild, James, 28,
173, 174, 262, 283,
340-41, 426
Rothschild, Nathan, 157,
159
Rothschild family, 173~74
Rouet, Louise de, 277
routine, 126
royalty, acting like,
282-90
Rubens, Peter Paul, 59
Rubicon, 192, 198
rudeness, 780
ruling, formless style of,
427
Russia, 230, 255-56, 327,
427
in war with japan,
65-66
Ryleyev, Kondraty, 35
Ryogaku, High Priest, 32.9
Saadi, 247-48
sacrifice, ritual, 203-4
sadists, financial, 335, 338
Sadler, A. L., 246-47, 323,
326-27
Saint-Evremond. Seigneur
de, 257
Sa.int»Simon, Louis de
Rouvroy, Due de,
34, 132-33, 184
Salinger, J. D., 120
Salk,jonas, 322, 323, 398
Samarkand, 139-40
Sand, George (Aurore
Dupin Dudevant),
194-95, 196, 306
Sanemon, Kawachiya, 210
San Lorenzo, 135
Sansovino,jacopo,
Santa Maria del Fiore,
66-67, 71
sarcasm, 35-36
Saturnalia, 3.93
Sauves, Charlotte de
Beaune Semblancay
de. 277
saying less than necessary,
31 -36
scandal, 45, 48, 49
scapegoats. 201-5, 214
mistakes in using, 214
scarcity, 120-21
Schimmel, Solomon, 407
Schleswig-Holstein, 239
Schopenhauer, Arthur:
on being cheated, 343
on combatting and correcting others, 327
on envy, 405
on getting others to reveal themselves, 104
mi intellect, 157-58, 174
on a man’s handling of
Lrifles, 277
on politeness and rudeness, 780
on self-interest, .97
on showing anger toward others, 327
on showing disdain for
others, 304
Schiippach, Michael (the
Mountain Doctor),
221-23
science, 398
Scientific Theory and Religion (Barnes), 422
Scotland, 147
seamless blend, 29
Second Panic War, 53
secret intelligence, 87
Seducefs Mirror, 378,
382, 384
seduction, 18, 233, 364-65
working on the hearts
and minds ofothers,
367-75
seesaw, image of, 74
Selassie, Haile, 25-27,
288, 327-29
Selected Fables (La Foncaine),
see In Fontaine, jean
de, fables of
self-consciousness, 196
self—control, 152, 153, 155,
167, 182, 196, 243,
330
hurrying and, 291
self—c1'eation, 191-99
self-discipline, 337
self-interest of others, uppealing to, 95-100,
372, 373-74
self-observation, 18}
selflsactifice, 373
sensation and scandal, 45,
48, 49
senses, 314
and creating cult,
2 17- 18
serpent with along mem»
ory, dealing with,
138
Scrtorius, 2,92-94
Seven Pillars afl/Wxdom
(Lawrence), 372
Sevigné, Marquis de,
I7-I8
sexuality, 225, 268
Seymour, Jane, 394
Sforza, Lodnvico, I50
Shadow, 377-78
Shah, Iéxies, 119, 270- 77,
238-39, 305.
319-20, 336-37
Shakespeare, William, 54,
55, 60, 79, 135, 299,
353
Shaw, George Bernard,
307
sheep’s skin, image of, 29
shepherd, striking of,
358-66
Sherman, William T.,
260-61
shield of Perseus, image
of, 390
Shigemune, ltakura,
326-27
Slw~o, Takeno, 387, 388
Shu Chan, l4l
Shuisky, Andrei, 231
Shuisky family, 231
Shu Kingdom, 38, 370
Sicily, 172, 241-42, 305,
381, 416
Sicyon, 235-67
Siena, patron saint of, 83
sight, 314
silence, 34-35, 36
Sima Y1, 38-39
simplicity, in creating cult,
217
sincerity, 196
false, 17, 21-22, 30
selective, 89, 90-91
single-mindedness, 175,
177
Sinigaglia, 708- 70
Sistine Chapel, 409
Sin, R.G.H., 207-8,
247-48, 295
skills, 86, 184
Slack, john, 157-59,
160-61
smoke screens, 23, 27, 28,
29, 30, 36, 129
“Snake, the Farmer, and
the Heron, The"
(African folktale), 70
sneak across the ocean in
broad daylight, 25
social circles, fantasy of
adventure vs.,
267-68
social movements, 295
social skills, 134, 184
Societies of Harmony, 224
Socrates, 381
Suderini, Piero, 7}-?2
Sodoms, ll, 45
Soemou, Hoshino, 209-11)
solitude, 133
solstice, 393
So much depends on reputation—guaxd it with
your life (Law 5),
37-43
sophistication, 160-61
source of power, striking
at, 358-66
INDEX -149
450 INDEX
sour-grapes approach, 306
Soviet Union, 149
Spain, 146, 150, 275, 293,
320, 326, 327
Balboa and, 237-38
jews persecuted in, 322
and search for El Dorado, 237, 238,
335-37
Sparta, 148, 164, 318, 319,
381-82, 420-22
war between Athens
and, 421-22, 427
Spassky, Boris, 124-26
spectacles, creation of,
309- 16
Spencer, W. B., 140
Spenser, Edmund, 146
spirit of the times, 182,
291, 292, 295
going against, 317
paying attention to, 399
xprezzatura, 250-51
spying, 143
by others, on you, 106
on others, 101-6
squabhles, being drawn
into, 150-54
Stalin, Joseph, 73
stars in the sky, image of, 6
Stavisky, Serge, 260
Stenclhal, 28, 149
stepping into a great man’s
shoes, 347-57
Stetten, Baron von, 104
Stevenson, Robert Louis,
322
Stir up waters to catch fish
(Law 39), 325-32
stopping, after victory,
410-18
strategy, military, 425-26
Strategy of the Crown,
287
Streetcar Named Desire, A
(Williams), 355
Strike the shepherd and
the sheep will scatter
(Law 42), 358-66
style, changing to fit differ
ent people, 180
Subtle Ruse, 7729: The Book
if/irabie Wisdom and
Guile’.
“God and Abraham,”
73- 74
“How to Broadcast
News,” 208-9
“The Sultan and the
Vizier,” 70-77
success, 414-15, 416
suckers:
playing dumber than,
156-62
typology of, 138-39
see also con artists
Sufi proverb, 72
“Sultan and the Vizier,
The” (The Subtle
Rust: The Book 0fArabiz Wisdom and
Guile), 70-77
Sumatra, 352
sun, image of, 120
Sung, Emperor, 10- 12
Sung Yi, 108
Sun Pin, 330, 332
Sun-tzu, 105, I11, 112, 172,
329, 330, 331, 377,
389, 430
surrender, 163-70
suspense, 123-29, 298
suspicious man, dealing
with, 138
Suzutomo, Akimoto, 344
symbols, 73, 309, 313-16,
323, 373, 387
images and, 314-15
Syracuse, 305
Tacitus, 72
Tadakatsu, Sakai, 246-47
T’ai Tsung, Emperor, 110
talent, 184
making a of, 187
and outshining master,
1 -7
Files ofthe Dervisluzs (Shah),
270-77, 379-20
Talleyrand Périgord,
Charles-Maurice de,
13, 22, 28, 293-94,
379
boar hunt and, 189-90
in conspiracy against
Napoleon, 13,
293-94, 326-27,
330
conversational skills of,
103-4
dishonest reputation of,
94
“effortless” accomplishments of, 251
Fouché and, 13,
293-94, 326, 327
information-gathering
of, 108-4
Isabey and, 184-85
July Revolution and,
154
and Napoleon‘s escape
from Elba, 63, 64, 65
positive qualifies of, 81
social connections of,
134
Tannyu, Kano, 210,
246-47
tanmims, 327, 329, 331
taste, jokes about, 181,
186, 189
tea bowl, 344
tea ceremony (Cha-no-yu),
5, 209, 210, 246,
306, 373, 326, 343,
344, 388
Teacher’s Mirror, 379
teacup, 343-44
Temple of Health, 220-22
tempo, 415
territory, for meetings, 66
Tesla, Nikola, 42-43, 48,
57-58, 59, 175
Testi, Fulvio, 186
theater, theatricality, 193,
199,270
in creating cult, 218
timing and, 197
Themistocles, 359, 362
Theoctistus, 9
Theodora, Empress, 9
thicket of shrubs, image of,
755
Thiers, Louis—Adolphe, 242
Think as you like but behave like others
(Law 38), 317-24
third eye of the spy, image
of, 105
“Thirty/—Six Strategies,
The” (Thejapanese
Art of Win), 25
Thoreau, Henry David,
408
Thucyclides, 98, 319
Thumb, Tom, 46, 270
thumbscrew, image of,
280
lhumbscrews, 271-81
Thunder in the Sky (Cleary,
trans), 73.9
Thurber, James, 277-I9
Thurber Carniml, Nu
(Thurber), 277* 7.9
Thumeisser, Leonhard, 267
Tiffany, Charles, 157, 158,
159
time, 295
end, 296, 298-99
forced, 296, 297~98
long, 295, 296-97
timidity, 227, 228, 233,
234, 235, 280
timing, 197
mastering the art of,
291-99
tiny wound, image of, 308
Titian, 46, 339
Tolstoy, Leo, 83, 752, 304,
471
Tomyfis, Queen, 411-12
“Tortoise, the Elephant,
and the Hippopotamus, The” (Zairean
fable), 57-58
tradition, 397-98, 399
Yieaswy afjewish Folklore, A
(Ausubel, ed.),
753-54, 207, 223-24
Treaty of Versailles, 114
tricks and techniques:
concealment ofi 245,
247, 251-52
partial disclosure of,
252-53
Trojan Horse, image of, 93
“Trout and the Gudgeon,
The” (Doclsley), 2.96
truth, appeal to, 263
Ts’ao 'I§’ao, 20l—2, 203,
330, 372-73
Tkunehiro, Dainagon, 30?
Tu Fu, 365
tulipomania, 120
Turkey, 297, 426
Turner, Aaron, 45
Thmer, M.W, 188, 407
turning the other cheek,
163, I69
Tuscany, 361
27 Histories, 183
“Two Adventurers, The"
(La Foniaine),
22B~2.9
“Two Dogs, The” (Kriloff),
77.9-80
“Two Frogs, The” (Aesop),
237
“Two Horses, The” (Tolstoy), 85‘
types of people, 137-44
Tyre, 331, 332
Uccelio, Paolo, 177, 251
unassuming, plain, and
often unintelligent
man, dealing with,
138439
unconventional ideas,
flaunting of, 317-24
unhappy and unlucky
people, avoiding of,
376-81
uniqueness, 317
unpredictability, 123-29
Unspoken Way, 7722 (Matsumoto), 336
Urban VIII, Pope, 186
Urbino, Duke of, 340
Use absence to increase
respect and honor
(Law 16), 115-22
Use selective honesty and
generosity to disarm
your victim (Law
12), 89-94
Use the surrender tactic:
transform weakness
into power (Law 22),
163—70
us-versus-them dynamic,
218v 19
Uzun Hasan, ‘Z97
vacuum, cultural, 353~54
reform and, 399
vagueness, in creating cult,
217
“Vainglorious Cockerel,
The” (Tolstoy), 417
Valois, Charles de,
361452
Valois, Marguerite de, 277
value, 344-
Vanbtugh, john, 337-38
I/Izrioms Fable: From Various
Places (d.i Prima, ed.),
33743
Vasari, Giorgio, 46, 135,
251, 350-57
Vasily III, Grand Duke,
230-31
Vega, Garcilaso de 13,
738
Velzlzquez, Diego Rn»
driguez de Silva,
196, 354-
Veniize, 150, 151, 152, 264
Bragadino and, 264—66,
267, 270
Vermeer, Jan, 268-69
Versailles, 2-3, 132-133,
134, 135, 184, 349,
353, 369, 413
Pare aux Cerfs at, 348,
414
Petit Trianon at, 368
Versailles, Treaty of, 114
Vettori, Francesco, xx
victims:
playing dumber than,
156-62
typology of, 138-39
Victoria, Queen, 46, 55,
270
victory, learning when to
stop in, 41048
Viernetm, 116
Vietnam War, 13, I48
Villa, Pancho, 301-3, 306
vines with many thorns,
image of, as
viper crushed beneath
your foot but left
alive, image of, 113
Virchow, Rudolf, 255
Virgin Queen, image of,
149
“Virtues ofthe Cock, The”
(Chinese parable),
117
virus, image of, 80
Visconfi, Primi, 33
visual images, 309, 313,
314- 16
in creating cult, 217-48
symbols and, 314-15
Vita d1’ Michelangelo (Condm}, 4064
Vitrolles, Baron cle, 103
Vollard, Ambroise, 260
Voltaire, 3, l0, 765, 374,
413
on Machiavelli, 322
vulgarity, 290
vulture, image of, 60
INDEX 3 4.91
452 INDEX
Wagner, Richard, 390-91
waiting, 296, 297
Wales, Prince of, 185
Wang Mang, 397
Waning ofthe MiddleAges,
I72: (Huizinga),
377- 72
warfare, strategy in,
425-26
Warhol, Andy, 35
Warner, Jack L., 27344
Wamke, Martin, 46-47
War of the Spanish Succession, 21
War of the Three Kingdoms, 330
Waxriofs Mirror, 377
Washington, George, 154,
198, 407
“Wasp and the Prince,
The” (Indian fable),
45
Watergate, 306
Waterloo, Battle of, 63,
294, 327
Water Margin, 77w, 395
weak links, 273
weakness, xviii, 367, 372,
400, 426
ofothers, discovering,
27l~8l
recovery from, 209
transforming into
power, l63~—7O
working hard and, 211
Wei, 370
w2i~du' (go), 363, 423~—24,
1
2
The POWER of Your Subconscious
Mind
Joseph Murphy
D.R.S., D.D., Ph.D., LL.D.
Fellow of the Andhra Research University of India
How This Book Can Work Miracles in Your Life
I have seen miracles happen to men and women in all walks
of life all over the world. Miracles will happen to you, too—
when you begin using the magic power of your subconscious
mind. This book is designed to teach you that your habitual
thinking and imagery mold, fashion, and create your destiny;
for as a man thinketh in his sub-conscious mind, so is he.
• Do you know the answers?
Why is one man sad and another man happy? Why is one man
joyous and prosperous and another man poor and miserable? Why is
one man fearful and anxious and another full of faith and confidence?
Why does one man have a beautiful, lux-urious home while another
man lives out a meager existence in a slum? Why is one man a great
success and another an ab-ject failure? Why is one speaker
outstanding and immensely popular and another mediocre and
unpopular? Why is one man a genius in his work or profession while
the other man toils and moils all his life without doing or
accomplishing anything worthwhile? Why is one man healed of a socalled incurable disease and another isn’t? Why is it so many good,
kind religious people suffer the tortures of the damned in their mind
and body? Why is it many immoral and irreligious people succeed and
prosper and enjoy radiant health? Why is one woman happily married
and her sister very unhappy and frustrated? Is there an answer to these
questions in the workings of your conscious and subconscious minds?
There most certainly is.
3
• Reason for writing this book
It is for the express purpose of answering and clarifying the above
questions and many others of a similar nature that mo-tivated me to
write this book. I have endeavored to explain the great fundamental
truths of your mind in the simplest language possible. I believe that it
is perfectly possible to explain the basic, foundational, and
fundamental laws of life and of your mind in ordinary everyday
language. You will find that the language of this book is that used in
your daily papers, current periodicals, in your business offices, in your
home, and in the daily work-shop. I urge you to study this book and
apply the techniques outlined therein; and as you do, I feel absolutely
convinced that you will lay hold of a miracle-working power that will
lift you up from confusion, misery, melancholy, and failure, and guide
you to your true place, solve your difficulties, sever you from
emotional and physical bondage, and place you on the royal road to
freedom, happiness, and peace of mind. This miracle-working power
of your subconscious mind can heal you of your sickness; make you
vital and strong again. In learning how to use your inner powers, you
will open the prison door of fear and enter into a life described by Paul
as the glorious liberty of the sons of God.
• Releasing the miracle-working power
A personal healing will ever be the most convincing evi-dence of
our subconscious powers. Over forty-two years ago I resolved a
malignancy—in medical terminology it was called a sarcoma—by
using the healing power of my subconscious mind, which created me
and still maintains and governs all my vital functions. The technique I
applied is elaborated on in this book, and I feel sure that it will help
others to trust the same Infinite Healing Presence lodged in the
subconscious depths of all men. Through the kindly offices of my
doctor friend, I suddenly real-ized that it was natural to assume that
the Creative Intelligence which made all my organs, fashioned my
body, and started my heart, could heal its own handiwork. The ancient
proverb says, “The doctor dresses the wound and God heals it.”
4
• Wonders happen when you pray effectively
Scientific prayer is the harmonious interaction of the con-scious and
subconscious levels of mind scientifically directed for a specific
purpose.
This book will teach you the scientific way to tap the realm of
infinite power within you enabling you to get what you really want in
life. You desire a happier, fuller, and richer life. Begin to use this
miracle-working power and smooth your way in daily affairs, solve
business problems, and bring harmony in family relationships. Be sure
that you read this book several times. The many chapters will show
you how this won-derful power works, and how you can draw out the
hidden in-spiration and wisdom that is within you. Learn the simple
tech-niques of impressing the subconscious mind.
Follow the new scientific way in tapping the infinite storehouse.
Read this book carefully, earnestly, and lovingly. Prove to yourself the
amazing way it can help you. It could be and I believe it will be the
turning point of your life.
• Everybody prays
Do you know how to pray effectively? How long is it since you
prayed as part of your everyday activities? In an emergency, in time of
danger or trouble, in illness, and when death lurks, prayers pour
forth—your own and friends. Just read your daily newspaper. It is
reported that prayers are being offered up all over the nation for a
child stricken with a so-called incurable ailment, for peace among
nations, for a group of miners trapped in a flooded mine. Later it is
reported that when rescued, the miners said that they prayed while
waiting for rescue; an airplane pilot says that he prayed as he made a
successful emergency landing. Certainly, prayer is an ever-present
help in time of trouble; but you do not have to wait for trouble to
make prayer an integral and constructive part of your life. The
dramatic an-swers to prayer make headlines and are the subject of
testimonies to the effectiveness of prayer. What of the many humble
prayers of children, the simple thanksgiving of grace at the table daily,
5
the faithful devotions wherein the individual seeks only com-munion
with God? My work with people has made it necessary for me to
study the various approaches to prayer. I have ex-perienced the power
of prayer in my own life, and I have talked and worked with many
people who also have enjoyed the help of prayer. The problem usually
is how to tell others how to pray. People who are in trouble have
difficulty in thinking and acting reasonably. They need an easy
formula to follow, an obviously workable pattern that is simple and
specific. Often they must be led to approach the emergency.
• Unique feature of this book
The unique feature of this book is its down-to-earth prac-ticality.
Here you are presented with simple, usable techniques and formulas,
which you can easily apply in your workaday world. I have taught
these simple processes to men and women all over the world, and
recently over a thousand men and women of all religious affiliations
attended a special class in Los Angeles where I presented the
highlights of what is offered in the pages of this book. Many came
from distances of two hundred miles for each class lesson. The special
features of this book will ap-peal to you because they show you why
oftentimes you get the opposite of what you prayed for and reveal to
you the reasons why. People have asked me in all parts of the world
and thou-sands of times, “Why is it I have prayed and prayed and got
no answer?” In this book you will find the reasons for this common
complaint. The many ways of impressing the subconscious mind and
getting the right answers make this an extraordinarily valu-able book
and an ever-present help in time of trouble.
• What do you believe?
It is not the thing believed in that brings an answer to man’s prayer;
the answer to prayer results when the individual’s sub-conscious mind
responds to the mental picture or thought in his mind. This law of
belief is operating in all religions of the world and is the reason why
they are psychologically true. The Bud-dhist, the Christian, the
Moslem, and the Hebrew all may get answers to their prayers, not
6
because of the particular creed, religion, affiliation, ritual, ceremony,
formula, liturgy, incanta-tion, sacrifices, or offerings, but solely
because of belief or mental acceptance and receptivity about that for
which they pray.
The law of life is the law of belief, and belief could be summed up
briefly as a thought in your mind. As a man thinks, feels, and believes,
so is the condition of his mind, body, and circum-stances. A
technique, a methodology based on an understanding of what you are
doing and why you are doing it will help you to bring about a
subconscious embodiment of all the good things of life. Essentially,
answered prayer is the realization of your heart’s desire.
• Desire is prayer
Everyone desires health, happiness, security, peace of mind, true
expression, but many fail to achieve clearly defined results. A
university professor admitted to me recently, “I know that if I changed
my mental pattern and redirected my emotional life, my ulcers would
not recur, but I do not have any technique, process, or modus
operandi. My mind wanders back and forth on my many problems,
and I feel frustrated, defeated, and unhappy.”
This professor had a desire for perfect health; he needed knowledge
of the way his mind worked which would enable him to fulfill his
desire. By practicing the healing methods outlined in this book, he
became whole and perfect.
• There is one mind common to all individual men (Emerson)
The miracle-working powers of your subconscious mind existed
before you and I were born, before any church or world existed. The
great eternal truths and principles of life antedate all religions. It is
with these thoughts in mind that I urge you in the following chapters
to lay hold of this wonderful, magical, transforming power, which will
bind up mental and physical wounds, proclaim liberty to the fearridden mind, and liberate you completely from the limitations of
poverty, failure, misery, lack, and frustration. All you have to do is
unite mentally and emotionally with the good you wish to embody,
7
and the creative powers of your subconscious will respond
accordingly. Begin now, today, let wonders happen in your life!
Keep on, keeping on until the day breaks and the shadows flee away.
Contents
1. The Treasure House Within You ... 19
• The master secret of the ages—The marvelous power of your
subconscious—Necessity of a working basis—The duality of mind—
The conscious and subconscious minds —Outstanding differences and
modesof operation—Howher subconscious responded—Brief
summary of ideas worth remembering.
2. How Your Own Mind Works ... 30
• Conscious and subconscious terms differentiated—Experiments by psychologists—The terms objective and subjec-tive mind
clarified—The subconscious cannot reason like your conscious
mind—The tremendous power of sugges-tion—Different reactions to
the same suggestion—How he lost his arm—How autosuggestion
banishes fear—How she restored her memory—How he overcame a
nasty temper —The constructive and destructive power of
suggestion— Have you accepted any of these—You can counteract
negative suggestions—How suggestion killed a man—The power of
an assumed major premise—The subconscious does not argue
controversially—Review of highlights.
3. The Miracle-Working Power of Your Subconscious ... 45
• Your subconscious is your Book of Life—What is im-pressed
in the subconscious is expressed—The subcon-scious heals a
malignancy of the skin—How the sub-conscious controls all functions
of the body—How to get the subconscious to work for you—Healing
principle of the subconscious restores atrophied optic nerves—How to
convey the idea of perfect health to your subconscious mind—Ideas
worth remembering.
8
4. Mental Healings in Ancient Times ... 55
• Bible accounts on the use of the subconscious powers—
Miracles at various shrines throughout the world—One universal
healing principle—Widely different theories—. Views of
Paracelsus—Bernheim’s experiments—Producing a blister by
suggestion—The cause of bloody stigmata— Healing points in
review.
5. Mental Healings in Modern Times ... 66
• One process of healing—The law of belief—Prayer therapy is
the combined function of the conscious and subconscious mind
scientifically directed—Faith healing, what it means, and how blind
faith works—Subjective faith and what it means—The meaning of
absent treatment—Releasing the kinetic action of the subconscious
mind—Summary of your aids to health.
6. Practical Techniques in Mental Healings ... 75
• The passing-over technique for impregnating the subconscious—Your subconscious will accept your blueprint— The science
and art of true prayer—The visualization tech-nique—Mental movie
method—The Baudoin tech-nique—The sleeping technique—The
“thank-you” tech-nique—The affirmative method—The
argumentative method—The absolute method is like modern sound
wave therapy—A cripple walks—The decree method—Serve yourself
with scientific truth.
7. The Tendency of the Subconscious Is Lifeward ... 90
• How the body portrays the workings of the mind—There-is an
intelligence which takes care of the body—The sub-conscious mind
works continually for the common good— How man interferes with
the innate principle of harmony —Why it’s normal to be healthy,
vital, and strong—It’s abnormal to be sick—Pott’s disease cured—
How faith in your subconscious powers makes you whole—Pointers
to review.
9
8. How to Get the Results You Want ... 98
• Easy does it—Infer no opponent, use imagination and not will
power—How disciplined imagination works wonders —The three
steps to success in prayer—The law of re-versed effort and why you
get the opposite of what you pray for—The conflict of desire and
imagination must be reconciled—Ideas worth recalling.
9. How to Use the Power of Your Subconscious for Wealth ... 105
• Wealth is of the mind—Your invisible means of support— The
ideal method for building a wealth consciousness —Why your
affirmations for wealth fail—How to avoid mental conflict—Don’t
sign blank checks—Your subcon-scious gives you compound
interest—Why nothing hap-pened—True source of wealth—Trying to
make ends meet and the real cause—A common stumbling block to
wealth —Rubbing out a great mental block to wealth—Sleep and
grow rich—Serve yourself with the powers of your mind.
10. Your Right to Be Rich ... 112
• Money is a symbol—How to walk the royal road to riches —
Why you do not have more money—Money and a bal-anced life—
Poverty is a mental disease—Why you must never criticize money—
Getting the right attitude toward money—How the scientific thinker
looks at money—How to attract the money you need—Why some
men do not get a raise in pay—Obstacles and impediments on the
pathway to riches—Protect your investments—You can-not get
something for nothing—Your constant supply of money—Step up this
way to riches.
11. Your Subconscious Mind as a Partner in Success ... 121
• The three steps to success—The measure of true success —How
he made his dream come true—His dream phar-macy became a
reality—Using the subconscious mind in business—Boy of sixteen
years turns failure into success— How to become successful in buying
and selling—How she succeeded in getting what she wanted—A
10
success tech-nique employed by many outstanding executives and
businessmen—Profitable pointers.
12. Scientists Use the Subconscious Mind ... 132
• How a distinguished scientist brought forth his inventions —
How a famous naturalist solved his problem—An out-standing
physician solved the problem of diabetes—How a famous scientist
and physicist escaped from a Russian concentration camp—How
archaeologists and paleontolo-gists reconstruct ancient scenes—How
to receive guidance from your subconscious—His subconscious
revealed the location of his father’s will—The secret of guidance—
Highlights to recall.
13. Your Subconscious and the Wonders of Sleep ... 141
• Why we sleep—Prayer, a form of sleep—Startling effects of
sleep deprivation—You need more sleep—Sleep brings counsel—
Saved from certain disaster—Your future is in your subconscious
mind—A cat nap nets him $15,000— How a famous professor solved
his problem in sleep—How the subconscious worked for a famous
writer while he slept—Sleep in peace and wake in joy—Summary
ofour aids to the wonders of sleep.
14. Your Subconscious Mind and Marital Problems ... 150
• The meaning of marriage—How to attract the ideal hus-band—
How to attract the ideal wife—No need for third mistake—How she
broke the negative pattern—The an-swer to her prayer—Should I get a
divorce?—Drifting into divorce—Divorce begins in the mind—The
nagging wife —The brooding husband—The great mistake—Don’t
try to make your wife over—Pray together and stay together through
steps in prayer—Review your actions.
15. Your Subconscious Mind and Your Happiness ... 161
• You must choose happiness—How to choose happiness— He
made it a habit to be happy—You must desire to be happy—Why
choose unhappiness—If I had a million dol-lars, I would be happy—
He found happiness to be the harvest of a quiet mind—The block or
11
stump is not really there—The happiest people—Summary of steps to
happi-ness.
16. Your Subconscious Mind and Harmonious Human Relations
... 169
• The master key to happy relationships with others—And with
what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again—The daily
headlines made him sick—I hate women, but I like men—His inner
speech held back his promotion —Becoming emotionally mature—
The meaning of love in harmonious human relations—He hated
audiences— Handling difficult people—Misery loves company—The
practice of empathy in human relations—Appeasement never wins—
Profitable pointers in human relations.
17. How to Use Your Subconscious Mind for Forgiveness ... 180
• Life always forgives you—How he banished that feeling of
guilt—A murderer learned to forgive himself—Criticism cannot hurt
you without your consent—How to be com-passionate—Left at the
altar— It is wrong to marry. Sex is evil and I am evil—Forgiveness is
necessary for healing— Forgiveness is love in action—Technique of
forgiveness —The acid test of forgiveness—To understand all is to
forgive all—Summary of your aids to forgiveness.
18. How Your Subconscious Removes Mental Blocks ... 191
• How to break or build a habit—How he broke a bad habit —The
power of his mental picture—Focused attention— He said a jinx was
following him—How much do you want what you want—Why he
could not be healed—The explanation and the cure—Refusing to
admit it—Building in the idea of freedom—Fifty-one per cent
healed—The law of substitution—Cause of alcoholism—Three magic
steps—Keep on keeping on—Review your thought power.
19. How to Use Your Subconscious Mind to Remove Fear ... 201
• Man’s greatest enemy—Do the tiling you fear—Banishing stage
fright—Fear of failure—How he overcame the fear —Fear of water,
mountains, closed places—Master tech-nique for overcoming any
12
particular fear—He blessed the elevator—Normal and abnormal
fear—Abnormal fear— The answer to abnormal fear—Examine your
fears—He landed in the jungle—He dismissed himself—They plotted
against him—Deliver yourself from all your fears—Step this way to
freedom from fear.
20. How to Stay Young in Spirit Forever ... 212
• He had grown old in his thought life—Age is the dawn of
wisdom—Welcome the change—Evidence for survival —Life is—
Mind and spirit do not grow old—You are as young as you think you
are—Your gray hairs are an asset —Age is an asset—Be your age—I
can keep up with the best of them—Fear of old age—You have much
to give— One hundred and ten years old—Retirement, a new
venture—He graduated to a better job—You must be a producer and
not a prisoner of society—Secret of youth —Get a vision—Your mind
does not grow old—His mind active at ninety-nine—We need our
senior citizens—The fruits of old age—Profitable pointers.
13
1
The Treasure House Within You
Infinite riches are all around you if you will open your mental eyes
and behold the treasure house of infinity within you. There is a gold
mine within you from which you can extract everything you need to
live life gloriously, joyously, and abun-dantly.
Many are sound asleep because they do not know about this gold
mine of infinite intelligence and boundless love within themselves.
Whatever you want, you can draw forth. A mag-netized piece of steel
will lift about twelve times its own weight, and if you demagnetize
this same piece of steel, it will not even lift a feather. Similarly, there
are two types of men. There is the magnetized man who is full of
confidence and faith. He knows that he is born to win and to succeed.
Then, there is the type of man who is demagnetized. He is full of fears
and doubts. Opportunities come, and he says, “I might fail; I might
lose my money; people will laugh at me.” This type of man will not
get very far in life because, if he is afraid to go forward, he will
simply stay where he is. Become a magnetized man and discover the
master secret of the ages.
• The master secret of the ages
What, in your opinion, is the master secret of the ages? The secret of
atomic energy? Thermonuclear energy? The neu-tron bomb?
Interplanetary travel? No—not any of these. Then, what is this master
secret? Where can one find it, and how can it be contacted and
brought into action? The answer is extraordinarily simple. This secret
is the marvelous, miracle-working power found in your own
subconscious mind, the last place that most people would seek it.
• The marvelous power of your subconscious
You can bring into your life more power, more wealth, more health,
more happiness, and more joy by learning to con-tact and release the
hidden power of your subconscious mind.
14
You need not acquire this power; you already possess it. But, you
want to learn how to use it; you want to understand it so that you can
apply it in all departments of your life.
As you follow the simple techniques and processes set forth in this
book, you can gain the necessary knowledge and under-standing. A
new light can inspire you, and you can generate a new force enabling
you to realize your hopes and make all your dreams come true. Decide
now to make your life grander, greater, richer, and nobler than ever
before.
Within your subconscious depths lie infinite wisdom, in-finite
power, and infinite supply of all that is necessary, which is waiting for
development and expression. Begin now to recog-nize these
potentialities of your deeper mind, and they will take form in the
world without.
The infinite intelligence within your subconscious mind can reveal
to you everything you need to know at every moment of time and
point of space provided you are open-minded and receptive. You can
receive new thoughts and ideas enabling you to bring forth new
inventions, make new discoveries, or write books and plays.
Moreover, the infinite intelligence in your sub-conscious can impart to
you wonderful kinds of knowledge of an original nature. It can reveal
to you and open the way for perfect expression and true place in your
life.
Through the wisdom of your subconscious mind you can attract the
ideal companion, as well as the right business asso-ciate or partner. It
can find the right buyer for your home, and provide you with all the
money you need, and the financial free-dom to be, to do, and to go, as
your heart desires.
It is your right to discover this inner world of thought, feel ing, and
power, of light, love, and beauty. Though invisible, its forces are
mighty. Within your subconscious mind you will find the solution for
every problem, and the cause for every effect. Because you can draw
out the hidden powers, you come into actual possession of the power
15
and wisdom necessary to move forward in abundance, security, joy,
and dominion.
I have seen the power of the subconscious lift people up out of
crippled states, making them whole, vital, and strong once more, and
free to go out into the world to experience happiness, health, and
joyous expression. There is a miraculous healing power in your
subconscious that can heal the troubled mind and the broken heart. It
can open the prison door of the mind and liberate you. It can free you
from all kinds of material and physi-cal bondage.
• Necessity of a working basis
Substantial progress in any field of endeavor is impossible in the
absence of a working basis, which is universal in its appli-cation. You
can become skilled in the operation of your sub-conscious mind. You
can practice its powers with a certainty of results in exact proportion
to your knowledge of its principles and to your application of them for
definite specific purposes and goals you wish to achieve.
Being a former chemist, I would like to point out that if you
combine hydrogen and oxygen in the proportions of two atoms of the
former to one of the latter, water would be the result. You are very
familiar with the fact that one atom of oxygen and one atom of carbon
will produce carbon monoxide, a poisonous gas. But, if you add
another atom of oxygen, you will get carbon dioxide, a harmless gas,
and so on throughout the vast realm of chemical compounds.
You must not think that the principles of chemistry, phys-ics, and
mathematics differ from the principles of your subcon-scious mind.
Let us consider a generally accepted principle: “Water seeks its own
level.” This is a universal principle, which is applicable to water
everywhere.
Consider another principle: “Matter expands when heated.”
This is true anywhere, at any time, and under all circumstances. You
can heat a piece of steel, and it will expand regardless whether the
steel is found in China, England, or India. It is a universal truth that
16
matter expands when heated. It is also a universal truth that whatever
you impress on your subconscious mind is expressed on the screen of
space as condition, experience, and event.
Your prayer is answered because your subconscious mind is
principle, and by principle I mean the way a thing works. For
example, the principle of electricity is that it works from a higher to a
lower potential. You do not change the principle of electricity when
you use it, but by co-operating with nature, you can bring forth
marvelous inventions and discoveries, which bless humanity in
countless ways.
Your subconscious mind is principle and works according to the law
of belief. You must know what belief is, why it works, and how it
works. Your Bible says in a simple, clear, and beau-tiful way:
Whosoever shall say unto this mountain, Be thou re-moved, and be
thou cast into the sea; and shall not doubt in his heart, but shall
believe that those things which he saith shall come to pass; he shall
have whatsoever he saith. MARK 11:23.
The law of your mind is the law of belief. This means to believe in
the way your mind works, to believe in belief itself. The belief of your
mind is the thought of your mind—that is simple—just that and
nothing else.
All your experiences, events, conditions, and acts are the reactions
of your subconscious mind to your thoughts. Remem-ber, it is not the
thing believed in, but the belief in your own mind, which brings about
the result.
Cease believing in the false beliefs, opinions, superstitions, and
fears of mankind. Begin to believe in the eternal verities and truths of
life, which never change. Then, you will move onward, upward, and
Godward.
Whoever reads this book and applies the principles of the
subconscious mind herein set forth; will be able to pray scien-tifically
and effectively for himself and for others. Your prayer is answered
according to the universal law of action and reac-tion. Thought is
17
incipient action. The reaction is the response from your subconscious
mind which corresponds with the na-ture of your thought. Busy your
mind with the concepts of har-mony, health, peace, and good will, and
wonders will happen in your life.
• The duality of mind
You have only one mind, but your mind possesses two dis-tinctive
characteristics. The line of demarcation between the two is well
known to all thinking men and women today. The two functions of
your mind are essentially unlike. Each is endowed with separate and
distinct attributes and powers. The nomen-clature generally used to
distinguish the two functions of your mind is as follows: The objective
and subjective mind, the conscious and subconscious mind, the
waking and sleeping mind, the surface self and the deep self, the
voluntary mind and the involuntary mind, the male and the female,
and many other terms. You will find the terms “conscious” and
“subconscious” used to represent the dual nature of your mind
throughout this book.
• The conscious and subconscious minds
An excellent way to get acquainted with the two functions of your
mind is to look upon your own mind as a garden. You are a gardener,
and you are planting seeds (thoughts) in your subconscious mind all
day long, based on your habitual think-ing. As you sow in your
subconscious mind, so shall you reap in your body and environment.
Begin now to sow thoughts of peace, happiness, right ac-tion, good
will, and prosperity. Think quietly and with interest on these qualities
and accept them fully in your conscious reason-ing mind. Continue to
plant these wonderful seeds (thoughts) in the garden of your mind, and
you will reap a glorious harvest. Your subconscious mind may be
likened to the soil, which will grow all kinds of seeds, good or bad.
Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? Every thought is,
therefore, a cause, and every condition is an effect. For this reason, it
is essential that you take charge of your thoughts so as to bring forth
only desirable conditions.
18
When your mind thinks correctly, when you understand the truth,
when the thoughts deposited in your subconscious mind are
constructive, harmonious, and peaceful, the magic working power of
your subconscious will respond and bring about harmonious
conditions, agreeable surroundings, and the best of everything. When
you begin to control your thought proc-esses, you can apply the
powers of your subconscious to any problem or difficulty. In other
words, you will actually be con-sciously cooperating with the infinite
power and omnipotent law, which governs all things.
Look around you wherever you live and you will notice that the vast
majority of mankind lives in the world without; the more enlightened
men are intensely interested in the world within. Remember, it is the
world within, namely, your thoughts, feelings, and imagery that makes
your world without. It is, there-fore, the only creative power, and
everything, which you find in your world of expression, has been
created by you in the inner world of your mind consciously or
unconsciously.
Knowledge of the interaction of your conscious and sub-conscious
minds will enable you to transform your whole life. In order to change
external conditions, you must change the cause. Most men try to
change conditions and circumstances by working with conditions and
circumstances. To remove discord, confusion, lack, and limitation,
you must remove the cause, and the cause is the way you are using
your conscious mind. In other words, the way you are thinking and
picturing in your mind.
You are living in a fathomless sea of infinite riches. Your
subconscious is very sensitive to your thoughts. Your thoughts form
the mold or matrix through which the infinite intelligence, wisdom,
vital forces, and energies of your subconscious flow. The practical
application of the laws of your mind as illustrated in each chapter of
this book will cause you to experience abund-ance for poverty,
wisdom for superstition and ignorance, peace for pain, joy for sadness,
light for darkness, harmony for discord, faith and confidence for fear,
19
success for failure, and freedom from the law of averages. Certainly,
there can be no more won-derful blessing than these from a mental,
emotional, and ma-terial standpoint. Most of the great scientists,
artists, poets, singers, writers, and inventors have a deep
understanding of the workings of the conscious and subconscious
minds.
One time Caruso, the great operatic tenor, was struck with stage
fright. He said his throat was paralyzed due to spasms caused by
intense fear, which constricted the muscles of his throat. Perspiration
poured copiously down his face. He was ashamed because in a few
minutes he had to go out on the stage, yet he was shaking with fear
and trepidation. He said, “They will laugh at me. I can’t sing.” Then
he shouted in the presence of those behind the stage, “The Little Me
wants to strangle the Big Me within.”
He said to the Little Me, “Get out of here, the Big Me wants to sing
through me.” By the Big Me, he meant the limitless power and
wisdom of his subconscious mind, and he began to shout, “Get out,
get out, the Big Me is going to sing!”
His subconscious mind responded releasing the vital forces within
him.
When the call came, he walked out on the stage and sang gloriously
and majestically, enthralling the audience.
It is obvious to you now that Caruso must have understood the two
levels of mind—the conscious or rational, and the sub-conscious or
irrational level. Your subconscious mind is reac-tive and responds to
the nature of your thoughts. When your conscious mind (the Little
Me) is full of fear, worry, and anxiety, the negative emotions
engendered in your subconscious mind (the Big Me) are released and
flood the conscious mind with a sense of panic, foreboding, and
despair. When this happens, you can, like Caruso, speak affirmatively
and with a deep sense of authority to the irrational emotions generated
in your deeper mind as follows: “Be still, be quiet, I am in control,
20
you must obey me, you are subject to my command, you cannot
intrude where you do not belong.”
It is fascinating and intensely interesting to observe how you can
speak authoritatively and with conviction to the irra-tional movement
of your deeper self bringing silence, harmony, and peace to your
mind. The subconscious is subject to the con-scious mind, and that is
why it is called subconscious or sub-jective.
• Outstanding differences and modes of operation
You will perceive the main differences by the following illustrations: The conscious mind is like the navigator or captain at the
bridge of a ship.
He directs the ship and signals orders to men in the engine room,
who in turn control all the boilers, instruments, gauges, etc. The men
in the engine room do not know where they are going; they follow
orders. They would go on the rocks if the man on the bridge issued
faulty or wrong instructions based on his findings with the compass,
sextant, or other instruments. The men in the engine room obey him
be-cause he is in charge and issues orders, which are automatically
obeyed. Members of the crew do not talk back to the captain; they
simply carry out orders.
The captain is the master of his ship, and his decrees are carried out.
Likewise, your conscious mind is the captain and the master of your
ship, which represents your body, environ-ment, and all your affairs.
Your subconscious mind takes the orders you give it based upon what
your conscious mind believes and accepts as true.
When you repeatedly say to people, “I can’t afford it,” then your
subconscious mind takes you at your word and sees to it that you will
not be in a position to purchase what you want. As long as you persist
in saying, “I can’t afford that car, that trip to Europe, that home, that
fur coat or ermine wrap,” you can rest assured that your subconscious
mind will follow your or-ders, and you will go through life
experiencing the lack of all these things.
21
Last Christmas Eve a beautiful young university student looked at
an attractive and rather expensive traveling bag in a store window. She
was going home to Buffalo, New York, for the holidays. She was
about to say, “I can’t afford that bag,” when she recalled something
she had heard at one of my lec-tures which was, “Never finish a
negative statement; reverse it immediately, and wonders will happen
in your life.”
She said, “That bag is mine. It is for sale. I accept it men-tally, and
my subconscious sees to it that I receive it.”
At eight o’clock Christmas Eve her fiancé presented her with a bag
exactly the same as the one she had looked at and mentally identified
herself with at ten o’clock the same morning. She had filled her mind
with the thought of expectancy and released the whole thing to her
deeper mind, which has the “know-how” of accomplishment.
This young girl, a student at the University of Southern California,
said to me, “I didn’t have the money to buy that bag, but now I know
where to find money and all the things I need, and that is in the
treasure house of eternity within me.”
Another simple illustration is this: When you say, “I do not like
mushrooms,” and the occasion subsequently comes that you are
served mushrooms in sauces or salads, you will get indi-gestion
because your subconscious mind says to you, “The boss (your
conscious mind) does not like mushrooms.” This is an amusing
example of the outstanding differences and modes of operation of
your conscious and subconscious minds.
A woman may say, “I wake up at three o’clock, if I drink coffee at
night.” Whenever she drinks coffee, her subconscious mind nudges
her, as if to say, “The boss wants you to stay awake tonight.”
Your subconscious mind works twenty-four hours a day and makes
provisions for your benefit, pouring all the fruit of your habitual
thinking into your lap.
22
• How her subconscious responded
A woman wrote me a few months ago as follows: “I am seventyfive years old, a widow with a grown family. I was liv-ing alone and
on a pension. I heard your lectures on the powers of the subconscious
mind wherein you said that ideas could be conveyed to the
subconscious mind by repetition, faith, and expectancy.
 “I began to repeat frequently with feeling, ‘I am wanted. I am
happily married to a kind, loving, and spiritual-minded man. I am
secure!’
“I kept on doing this many times a day for about two weeks, and
one day at the corner drugstore, I was introduced to a retired
pharmacist. I found him to be kind, understanding, and very religious.
He was a perfect answer to my prayer. Within a week he proposed to
me, and now we are on our honeymoon in Europe. I know that the
intelligence within my subconscious mind brought both of us together
in divine order.”
This woman discovered that the treasure house was within her. Her
prayer was felt as true in her heart, and her affirmation sank down by
osmosis into her subconscious mind, which is the creative medium.
The moment she succeeded in bringing about a subjective
embodiment, her subconscious mind brought about the answer
through the law of attraction.
Her deeper mind, full of wisdom and intelligence, brought both of
them together in divine order.
Be sure that you think on whatsoever things are true, what-soever
things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are
pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good
report; if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these
things. PHIL. 4:8.
• Brief summary of ideas worth remembering
1. The treasure house is within you. Look within for the an-swer to
your heart’s desire.
23
2. The great secret possessed by the great men of all ages was their
ability to contact and release the powers of their sub conscious mind.
You can do the same.
3. Your subconscious has the answer to all problems. If you suggest
to your subconscious prior to sleep, “I want to get up at 6 A.M.,” it
will awaken you at that exact time.
4. Your subconscious mind is the builder of your body and can heal
you. Lull yourself to sleep every night with the idea of perfect health,
and your subconscious, being your faithful servant, will obey you.
5. Every thought is a cause, and every condition is an effect.
6. If you want to write a book, write a wonderful play, give a better
talk to your audience, convey the idea lovingly and feelingly to your
subconscious mind, and it will respond accordingly.
7. You are like a captain navigating a ship. He must give the right
orders, and likewise, you must give the right orders (thoughts and
images) to your subconscious mind, which controls and governs all
your experiences.
8. Never use the terms, “I can’t afford it” or “I can’t do this.” Your
subconscious mind takes you at your word and sees to it that you do
not have the money or the ability to do what you want to do. Affirm,
“I can do all things through the power of my subconscious mind.”
9. The law of life is the law of belief. A belief is a thought in your
mind. Do not believe in things to harm or hurt you. Believe in the
power of your subconscious to heal, inspire, strengthen, and prosper
you. According to your belief is it done unto you.
10. Change your thoughts, and you change your destiny.
24
2
How Your Own Mind Works
You have a mind, and you should learn how to use it. There are two
levels of your mind—the conscious or rational level, and the
subconscious or irrational level. You think with your conscious mind,
and whatever you habitually think sinks down into your subconscious
mind, which creates according to the nature of your thoughts. Your
subconscious mind is the seat of your emotions and is the creative
mind. If you think good, good will follow; if you think evil, evil will
follow. This is the way your mind works.
The main point to remember is once the subconscious mind accepts
an idea, it begins to execute it. It is an interesting and subtle truth that
the law of the subconscious mind works for good and bad ideas alike.
This law, when applied in a negative way, is the cause of failure,
frustration, and unhappiness. How-ever, when your habitual thinking
is harmonious and construc-tive, you experience perfect health,
success, and prosperity.
Peace of mind and a healthy body are inevitable when you begin to
think and feel in the right way. Whatever you claim mentally and feel
as true, your subconsciousmind will accept and bring forth into your
experience. The only thing necessary for you to do is to get your
subconscious mind to accept your idea, and the law of your own
subconscious mind will bring forth the health, peace, or the position
you desire. You give the command or decree, and your subconscious
will faithfully repro-duce the idea impressed upon it. The law of your
mind is this: You will get a reaction or response from your
subconscious mind according to the nature of the thought or idea you
hold in your conscious mind.
Psychologists and psychiatrists point out that when thoughts are
conveyed to your subconscious mind, impressions are made in the
brain cells. As soon as your subconscious accepts any idea, it proceeds
to put it into effect immediately. It works by asso-ciation of ideas and
25
uses every bit of knowledge that you have gathered in your lifetime to
bring about its purpose. It draws on the infinite power, energy, and
wisdom within you. It lines up all the laws of nature to get its way.
Sometimes it seems to bring about an immediate solution to your
difficulties, but at other times it may take days, weeks, or longer. ... Its
ways are past finding out.
• Conscious and subconscious terms differentiated
You must remember that these are not two minds. They are merely
two spheres of activity within one mind. Your conscious mind is the
reasoning mind. It is that phase of mind, which chooses. For example,
you choose your books, your home, and your partner in life. You
make all your decisions with your con-scious mind. On the other
hand, without any conscious choice on your part, your heart is kept
functioning automatically, and the process of digestion, circulation,
and breathing are carried on by your subconscious mind through
processes independent of your conscious control.
Your subconscious mind accepts what is impressed upon it or what
you consciously believe. It does not reason things out like your
conscious mind, and it does not argue with you contro-versially. Your
subconscious mind is like the soil, which accepts any kind of seed,
good or bad. Your thoughts are active and might be likened unto
seeds. Negative, destructive thoughts continue to work negatively in
your subconscious mind, and in due time will come forth into outer
experience which corresponds with them.
Remember, your subconscious mind does not engage in proving
whether your thoughts are good or bad, true or false, but it responds
according to the nature of your thoughts or suggestions. For example,
if you consciously assume something as true, even though it may be
false, your subconscious mind will accept it as true and proceed to
bring about results, which must neces-sarily follow, because you
consciously assumed it to be true.
26
• Experiments by psychologists
Innumerable experiments by psychologists and others on persons in
the hypnotic state have shown that the subconscious mind is incapable
of making selections and comparisons, which are necessary for a
reasoning process. They have shown re-peatedly that your
subconscious mind will accept any sugges-tions, however false.
Having once accepted any suggestion, it responds according to the
nature of the suggestion given.
To illustrate the amenability of your subconscious mind to
suggestion, if a practiced hypnotist suggests to one of his sub-jects
that he is Napoleon Bonaparte, or even a cat or a dog, he will act out
the part with inimitable accuracy. His personality becomes changed
for the time being. He believes himself to be whatever the operator
tells him he is.
A skilled hypnotist may suggest to one of his students in the
hypnotic state that his back itches, to another that his nose is bleeding,
to another that he is a marble statue, to another that he is freezing and
the temperature is below zero. Each one will follow out the line of his
particular suggestion, totally oblivious to all his surroundings, which
do not pertain to his idea.
These simple illustrations portray clearly the difference be-tween
your conscious reasoning mind and your subconscious mind, which is
impersonal, non-selective, and accepts as true whatever your
conscious mind believes to be true. Hence, the importance of selecting
thoughts, ideas, and premises, which bless, heal, inspire, and fill your
soul with joy.
• The terms objective and subjective mind clarified
Your conscious mind is sometimes referred to as your objective
mind because it deals with outward objects. The ob-jective mind takes
cognizance of the objective world. Its media of observation are your
five physical senses. Your objective mind is your guide and director in
your contact with your environ-ment. You gain knowledge through
your five senses. Your ob-jective mind learns through observation,
27
experience, and educa-tion. As previously pointed out, the greatest
function of the objective mind is that of reasoning.
Suppose you are one of the thousands of tourists who come to Los
Angeles annually. You would come to the conclusion that it is a
beautiful city based upon your observation of the parks, pretty
gardens, majestic buildings, and lovely homes. This is the working of
your objective mind.
Your subconscious mind is oftentimes referred to as your subjective
mind. Your subjective mind takes cognizance of its environment by
means independent of the five senses. Your sub-jective mind
perceives by intuition.
It is the seat of your emo-tion and the storehouse of memory. Your
subjective mind per-forms its highest functions when your objective
senses are in abeyance. In a word, it is that intelligence which makes
itself manifest when the objective mind is suspended or in a sleepy,
drowsy state.
Your subjective mind sees without the use of the natural organs of
vision. It has the capacity of clairvoyance and clair-audience. Your
subjective mind can leave your body, travel to distant lands, and bring
back information oftentimes of the most exact and truthful character.
Through your subjective mind you can read the thoughts of others,
read the contents of sealed en-velopes and closed safes. Your
subjective mind has the ability to apprehend the thoughts of others
without the use of the ordi-nary objective means of communication. It
is of the greatest importance that we understand the interaction of the
objective and subjective mind in order to learn the true art of prayer.
• The subconscious cannot reason like your conscious mind
Your subconscious mind cannot argue controversially. Hence, if
you give it wrong suggestions, it will accept them as true and will
proceed to bring them to pass as conditions, ex-periences, and events.
All things that have happened to you are based on thoughts impressed
on your subconscious mind through belief. If you have conveyed
erroneous concepts to your sub-conscious mind, the sure method of
28
overcoming them is by the repetition of constructive, harmonious
thoughts frequently re-peated which your subconscious mind accepts,
thus forming new and healthy habits of thought and life, for your
subconscious mind is the seat of habit.
The habitual thinking of your conscious mind establishes deep
grooves in your subconscious mind. This is very favorable for you if
your habitual thoughts are harmonious, peaceful, and constructive.
If you have indulged in fear, worry, and other destructive forms of
thinking, the remedy is to recognize the omnipotence of your
subconscious mind and decree freedom, happiness, and perfect health.
Your subconscious mind, being creative and one with your divine
source, will proceed to create the freedom and happiness, which you
have earnestly decreed.
• The tremendous power of suggestion
You must realize by now that your conscious mind is the
“watchman at the gate,” and its chief function is to protect your
subconscious mind from false impressions. You are now aware of one
of the basic laws of mind:
Your subconscious mind is amenable to suggestion. As you know,
your subconscious mind does not make comparisons, or contrasts,
neither does it reason and think things out for itself. This latter
function belongs to your conscious mind. It simply reacts to the
impressions given to it by your conscious mind. It does not show a
preference for one course of action over another.
The following is a classic example of the tremendous power of
suggestion. Suppose you approach a timid-looking passenger on board
ship and say to him something like this: “You look very ill. How pale
you are! I feel certain you are going to be seasick. Let me help you to
your cabin.” The passenger turns pale. Your suggestion of seasickness
associates itself with his own fears and forebodings. He accepts your
aid down to the berth, and there your negative suggestion, which was
accepted by him, is realized.
29
• Different reactions to the same suggestion
It is true that different people will react in different ways to the
same suggestion because of their subconscious conditioning or belief.
For example, if you go to a sailor on the ship and say to him
sympathetically, “My dear fellow, you’re looking very ill. Aren’t you
feeling sick? You look to me as if you were going to be seasick.”
According to his temperament he either laughs at your “joke,” or
expresses a mild irritation. Your suggestion fell on deaf ears in this
instance because your suggestion of seasickness was associated in his
mind with his own immunity from it. There-fore, it called up not fear
or worry, but selfconfidence.
The dictionary says that a suggestion is the act or instance of putting
something into one’s mind, the mental process by which the thought
or idea suggested is entertained, accepted, or put into effect. You must
remember that a suggestion cannot impose something on the
subconscious mind against the will of the conscious mind. In other
words, your conscious mind has the power to reject the suggestion
given. In the case of the sailor, he had no fear of seasickness. He had
convinced himself of his immunity, and the negative suggestion had
absolutely no power to evoke fear.
The suggestion of seasickness to the other passenger called forth his
indwelling fear of seasickness. Each of us has his own inner fears,
beliefs, opinions, and these inner assumptions rule and govern our
lives. A suggestion has no power in and of itself except if you accept
it mentally.
This causes your subconscious powers to flow in a limited and
restricted way according to the nature of the suggestion.
• How he lost his arm
Every two or three years I give a series of lectures at the London
Truth Forum in Caxton Hall. This is a Forum I founded a number of
years ago. Dr. Evelyn Fleet, the director, told me about an article
which appeared in the English newspapers deal-ing with the power of
30
suggestion. This is the suggestion a man gave to his subconscious
mind over a period of about two years: “I would give my right arm to
see my daughter cured.” It ap-peared that his daughter had a crippling
form of arthritis together with a so-called incurable form of skin
disease. Medical treatment had failed to alleviate the condition, and
the father had an intense longing for his daughter’s healing, and
expressed his desire in the words just quoted.
Dr. Evelyn Fleet said that the newspaper article pointed out that one
day the family was out riding when their car col-lided with another.
The father’s right arm was torn off at the shoulder, and immediately
the daughter’s arthritis and skin con-dition vanished.
You must make certain to give your subconscious only suggestions,
which heal, bless, elevate, and inspire you in all your ways.
Remember that your subconscious mind cannot take a joke. It takes
you at your word.
• How autosuggestion banishes fear
Illustrations of autosuggestion: Autosuggestion means sug-gesting
something definite and specific to oneself. Herbert Parkyn, in his
excellent manual of autosuggestion,* records the following incident. It
has its amusing side, so that one remem-bers it. “A New York visitor
in Chicago looks at his watch, which is set an hour ahead of Chicago
time, and tells a Chicago friend that it is twelve o’clock. The Chicago
friend, not considering the difference in time between Chicago and
New York, tells the New Yorker that he is hungry and that he must go
to lunch.”
Autosuggestion may be used to banish various fears and other
negative conditions. A young singer was invited to give an audition.
She had been looking forward to the interview, but on three previous
occasions she had failed miserably due to fear of failure. This young
lady had a very good voice, but she had been saying to herself, “When
the time comes for me to sing, maybe they won’t like me. I will try,
but I’m full of fear and anxiety.”
31
Her subconscious mind accepted these negative autosugges-tions as
a request and proceeded to manifest them and bring them into her
experience.
The cause was an involuntary auto-suggestion, i.e., silent fear
thoughts emotionalized and subjecti-fied.
She overcame it by the following technique: Three times a day she
isolated herself in a room. She sat down comfortably in an armchair,
relaxed her body, and closed her eyes. She stilled her mind and body
as best she could. Physical inertia favors mental passivity and renders
the mind more receptive to sug-gestion. She counteracted the fear
suggestion by saying to her-self, “I sing beautifully. I am poised,
serene, confident, and calm.” She repeated this statement slowly,
quietly, and with feel-ing from five to ten times at each sitting. She
had three such “sittings” every day and one immediately prior to
sleep. At the end of a week she was completely poised and confident.
When the invitation to audition came, she gave a remarkable, wonderful audition.
• How she restored her memory
A woman, aged seventy-five, was in the habit of saying to herself,
“I am losing my memory.” She reversed the procedure and practiced
induced autosuggestion several times a day as follows: “My memory
from today on is improving in every department. I shall always
remember whatever I need to know at every moment of time and point
of space. The impressions received will be clearer and more definite. I
shall retain them automatically and with ease. Whatever I wish to
recall will im-mediately present itself in the correct form in my mind.
I am improving rapidly every day, and very soon my memory will be
better than it has ever been before.” At the end of three weeks, her
memory was back to normal, and she was delighted.
• How he overcame a nasty temper
Many men who complained of irritability and bad temper proved to
be very susceptible to autosuggestion and obtained marvelous results
by using the following statements three or four times a day—morning,
32
noon, and at night prior to sleep for about a month. “Henceforth, I
shall grow more goodhumored.
Joy, happiness, and cheerfulness are now becoming my normal
states of mind. Every day I am becoming more and more lov-able and
understanding. I am now becoming the center of cheer and good will
to all those about me, infecting them with good humor. This happy,
joyous, and cheerful mood is now becom-ing my normal, natural state
of mind. I am grateful.”
• The constructive and destructive power of suggestion
Some illustrations and comments on heterosuggestion:
Heterosuggestion means suggestions from another person. In all
ages the power of suggestion has played a part in the life and thought
of man in every period of time and in each country of the earth. In
many parts of the world it is the controlling power in religion.
Suggestion may be used to discipline and control ourselves, but it
can also be used to take control and command over others who do not
know the laws of mind. In its constructive form it is wonderful and
magnificent. In its negative aspects it is one of the most destructive of
all the response patterns of the mind, resulting in patterns of misery,
failure, suffering, sickness, and disaster.
• Have you accepted any of these?
From infancy on the majority of us have been given many negative
suggestions. Not knowing how to thwart them, we un-consciously
accepted them. Here are some of the negative sug-gestions: “You
can’t.” “You’ll never amount to anything.” “You mustn’t.” “You’ll
fail.” “You haven’t got a chance.” “You’re all wrong.” “It’s no use.”
“It’s not what you know, but who you know.” “The world is going to
the dogs.” “What’s the use, no-body cares.” “It’s no use trying so
hard.” “You’re too old now.” “Things are getting worse and worse.”
“Life is an endless grind.” “Love is for the birds.” “You just can’t
win.” “Pretty soon you’ll be bankrupt.” “Watch out, you’ll get the
virus.”
33
“You can’t trust a soul,” etc.
Unless, as an adult, you use constructive autosuggestion, which is a
reconditioning therapy, the impressions made on you in the past can
cause behavior patterns that cause failure in your personal and social
life.
Autosuggestion is a means releasing you from the mass of negative
verbal conditioning that might other-wise distort your life pattern,
making the development of good habits difficult.
• You can counteract negative suggestions
Pick up the paper any day, and you can read dozens of items that
could sow the seeds of futility, fear, worry, anxiety, and impending
doom. If accepted by you, these thoughts of fear could cause you to
lose the will for life. Knowing that you can reject all these negative
suggestions by giving your subconscious mind constructive
autosuggestions, you counteract all these de-structive ideas.
Check regularly on the negative suggestions that people make to
you. You do not have to be influenced by destructive
heterosuggestion. All of us have suffered from it in our child-hood and
in our teens. If you look back, you can easily recall how parents,
friends, relatives, teachers, and associates contrib-uted in a campaign
of negative suggestions. Study the things said to you, and you will
discover much of it was in the form of propaganda. The purpose of
much of what was said was to con-trol you or instill fear into you.
This heterosuggestion process goes on in every home, office,
factory, and club. You will find that many of these suggestions are for
the purpose of making you think, feel, and act, as others want you to
and in ways that are to their advantage.
• How suggestion killed a man
Here is an illustration of heterosuggestion: A relative of mine went
to a crystal gazer in India who told him that he had a bad heart and
predicted that he would die at the next new moon. He began to tell all
members of his family about this pre-diction, and he arranged his will.
34
This powerful suggestion entered into his subconscious mind
because he accepted it completely. My relative also told me that this
crystal gazer was believed to have some strange occult powers, and he
could do harm or good to a person. He died as predicted not knowing
that he was the cause of his own death. I suppose many of us have
heard similar stupid, ridiculous, superstitious stories.
Let us look at what happened in the light of our knowledge of the
way the subconscious mind works. Whatever the con-scious,
reasoning mind of man believes; the subconscious mind will accept
and act upon. My relative was happy, healthy, vig-orous, and robust
when he went to see the fortuneteller. She gave him a very negative
suggestion, which he accepted.
He be-came terrified, and constantly dwelt upon the fact that he was
going to die at the next new moon. He proceeded to tell every-one
about it, and he prepared for the end. The activity took place in his
own mind, and his own thought was the cause. He brought about his
own so-called death, or rather destruction of the physical body, by his
fear and expectation of the end.
The woman who predicted his death had no more power than the
stones and sticks in the field. Her suggestion had no power to create or
bring about the end she suggested. If he had known the laws of his
mind, he would have completely rejected the negative suggestion and
refused to give her words any atten-tion, knowing in his heart that he
was governed and controlled by his own thought and feeling. Like tin
arrows aimed at a bat-tleship, her prophecy could have been
completely neutralized and dissipated without hurting him.
The suggestions of others in themselves have absolutely no power
whatever over you except the power that you give them through your
own thoughts. You have to give your mental con-sent; you have to
entertain the thought. Then, it becomes your thought, and you do the
thinking. Remember, you have the capacity to choose. Choose life!
Choose love! Choose health!
35
• The power of an assumed major premise
Your mind works like a syllogism. This means that what-ever major
premise your conscious mind assumes to be true de-termines the
conclusion your subconscious mind comes to in regard to any
particular question or problem in your mind. If your premise is true,
the conclusion must be true as in the fol-lowing example:
Every virtue is laudable; Kindness is a virtue; Therefore, kindness is
laudable.
Another example is as follows:
All formed things change and pass away; The Pyramids of Egypt
are formed things; Therefore, some day the Pyramids will pass away.
The first statement is referred to as the major premise, and the right
conclusion must necessarily follow the right premise.
A college professor, who attended some of my science of mind
lectures in May, 1962, at Town Hall, New York, said to me,
“Everything in my life is topsy-turvy, and I have lost health, wealth,
and friends. Everything I touch turns out wrong.”
I explained to him that he should establish a major prem-ise in his
thinking, that the infinite intelligence of his subcon-scious mind was
guiding, directing, and prospering him spirit-ually, mentally, and
materially.
Then, his subconscious mind would automatically direct him wisely
in his investments, deci-sions, and also heal his body and restore his
mind to peace and tranquility.
This professor formulated an over-all picture of the way he wanted
his life to be, and this was his major premise: “Infinite intelligence
leads and guides me in all my ways. Perfect health is mine, and the
Law of Harmony operates in my mind and body. Beauty, love, peace,
and abundance are mine. The principle of right action and divine order
govern my entire life. I know my major premise is based on the
eternal truths of life, and I know, feel, and believe that my
36
subconscious mind responds according to the nature of my conscious
mind think-ing.”
He wrote me as follows: “I repeated the above statements slowly,
quietly, and lovingly several times a day knowing that they were
sinking deep down into my subconscious mind, and that results must
follow. I am deeply grateful for the interview you gave me, and I
would like to add that all departments of my life are changing for the
better. It works!”
• The subconscious does not argue controversially
Your subconscious mind is all-wise and knows the answers to all
questions. It does not argue with you or talk back to you. It does not
say, “You must not impress me with that.” For ex-ample, when you
say, “I can’t do this.” “I am too old now.” “I can’t meet this
obligation.” “I was born on the wrong side of the tracks.” “I don’t
know the right politician,” you are impregnating your subconscious
with these negative thoughts, and it responds accordingly. You are
actually blocking your own good, thereby bringing lack, limitation,
and frustration into your life.
When you set up obstacles, impediments, and delays in your
conscious mind, you are denying the wisdom and intelli-gence
resident in your subconscious mind. You are actually say-ing in effect
that your subconscious mind cannot solve your problem. This leads to
mental and emotional congestion, fol-lowed by sickness and neurotic
tendencies.
To realize your desire and overcome your frustration, affirm boldly
several times a day: “The infinite intelligence which gave me this
desire leads, guides, and reveals to me the perfect plan for the
unfolding of my desire. I know the deeper wisdom of my
subconscious is now responding, and what I feel and claim within is
expressed in the without. There is a balance, equilibrium, and
equanimity.”
If you say, “There is no way out; I am lost; there is no way out of
this dilemma; I am stymied and blocked,” you will get no answer or
37
response from your subconscious mind. If you want the subconscious
to work for you, give it the right request, and attain its co-operation. It
is always working for you. It is con-trolling your heartbeat this minute
and also your breathing. It heals a cut on your finger, and its tendency
is lifeward, forever seeking to take care of you and preserve you. Your
subconscious has a mind of its own, but it accepts your patterns of
thought and imagery.
When you are seeking an answer to a problem, your sub-conscious
will respond, but it expects you to come to a decision and to a true
judgment in your conscious mind. You must acknowledge the answer
is in your subconscious mind. However, if you say, “I don’t think
there is any way out; I am all mixed up and confused; why don’t I get
an answer?” you are neutralizing your prayer. Like the soldier
marking time, you do not get anywhere.
Still the wheels of your mind, relax, let go, and quietly affirm: “My
subconscious knows the answer. It is responding to me now. I give
thanks because I know the infinite intelligence of my subconscious
knows all things and is revealing the perfect answer to me now. My
real conviction is now setting free the majesty and glory of my
subconscious mind. I rejoice that it is so.”
• Review of highlights
1. Think good, and good follows. Think evil, and evil follows. You
are what you think all day long.
2. Your subconscious mind does not argue with you. It ac-cepts
what your conscious mind decrees. If you say, “I can’t afford it,” it
may be true, but do not say it. Select a better thought, decree, “I’ll buy
it. I accept it in my mind.”
3. You have the power to choose. Choose health and happiness. You
can choose to be friendly, or you can choose to be unfriendly. Choose
to be co-operative, joyous, friendly, lovable, and the whole world will
respond. This is the best way to develop a wonderful personality.
38
4. Your conscious mind is the “watchman at the gate.” Its chief
function is to protect your subconscious mind from false impressions.
Choose to believe that something good can happen and is happening
now. Your greatest power is your capacity to choose. Choose
happiness and abundance.
5. The suggestions and statements of others have no power to hurt
you. The only power is the movement of your own thought. You can
choose to reject the thoughts or statements of others and affirm the
good. You have the power to choose how you will react.
6. Watch what you say. You have to account for every idle word.
Never say, “I will fail; I will lose my job; I can’t pay the rent.” Your
subconscious cannot take a joke. It brings all these things to pass.
7. Your mind is not evil. No force of nature is evil. It depends how
you use the powers of nature. Use your mind to bless, heal, and inspire
all people everywhere.
8. Never say, “I can’t.” Overcome that fear by substituting the
following, “I can do all things through the power of my own
subconscious mind.”
9. Begin to think from the standpoint of the eternal truths and
principles of life and not from the standpoint of fear, ignorance, and
superstition. Do not let others do your think-ing for you. Choose your
own thoughts and make your own decisions.
10. You are the captain of your soul (subconscious mind) and the
master of your fate. Remember, you have the capacity to choose.
Choose life! Choose love! Choose health! Choose happiness!
11. Whatever your conscious mind assumes and believes to be true,
your subconscious mind will accept and bring to pass. Believe in good
fortune, divine guidance, right action, and all the blessings of life.
39
3
The Miracle-Working Power of Your
Subconscious
The power of your subconscious is enormous. It inspires you, it
guides you, and it reveals to you names, facts, and scenes from the
storehouse of memory. Your subconscious started your heartbeat,
controls the circulation of your blood, and regulates your digestion,
assimilation, and elimination.
When you eat a piece of bread, your subconscious mind transmutes
it into tissue, muscle, bone, and blood. This process is beyond the ken
of the wisest man who walks the earth. Your subconscious mind
controls all the vital processes and functions of your body and knows
the answer to all problems.
Your subconscious mind never sleeps, never rests. It is al-ways on
the job. You can discover the miracle-working power of your
subconscious by plainly stating to your subconscious prior to sleep
that you wish a certain specific thing accomplished. You will be
delighted to discover that forces within you will be re-leased, leading
to the desired result. Here, then, is a source of power and wisdom
which places you in touch with omnipotence or the power that moves
the world, guides the planets in their course, and causes the sun to
shine.
Your subconscious mind is the source of your ideals, aspira-tions,
and altruistic urges. It was through the subconscious mind that
Shakespeare perceived great truths hidden from the average man of
his day. Undoubtedly, it was the response of his sub-conscious mind
that caused the Greek sculptor, Phidias, to por-tray beauty, order,
symmetry, and proportion in marble and bronze. It enabled the Italian
artist, Raphael, to paint Madonnas, and Ludwig van Beethoven to
compose symphonies.
40
In 1955 I lectured at the Yoga Forest University, Rishikesh, India,
and there I chatted with a visiting surgeon from Bombay. He told me
about Dr.
James Esdaille, a Scotch surgeon, who worked in Bengal before
ether or other modern methods of anesthesia were discovered.
Between 1843 and 1846, Dr. Es-daille performed about four hundred
major operations of all kinds, such as amputations, removal of tumors
and cancerous growths, as well as operations on the eye, ear, and
throat. All operations were conducted under mental anesthesia only.
This Indian doctor at Rishikesh informed me that the postoperative
mortality rate of patients operated on by Dr. Esdaille was ex-tremely
low, probably two or three percent. Patients felt no pain, and there
were no deaths during the operations.
Dr. Esdaille suggested to the subconscious minds of all his patients,
who were in a hypnotic state, that no infection or septic condition
would develop.
You must remember that this was be-fore Louis Pasteur, Joseph
Lister, and others who pointed out the bacterial origin of disease and
causes of infection due to unsterilized instruments and virulent
organisms.
This Indian surgeon said that the reason for the low mor-tality rate
and the general absence of infection, which was re-duced to a
minimum, was undoubtedly due to the suggestions of Dr. Esdaille to
the subconscious minds of his patients. They responded according to
the nature of his suggestion.
It is simply wonderful, when you conceive how a surgeon, over one
hundred twenty years ago, discovered the miraculous wonder-working
powers of the subconscious mind. Doesn’t it cause you to be seized
with a sort of mystic awe when you stop and think of the
transcendental powers of your subconscious mind? Consider its
extrasensory perceptions, such as its ca-pacity for clairvoyance and
clairaudience, its independence of time and space, its capacity to
render you free from all pain and suffering, and its capacity to get the
41
answer to all problems, be they what they may. All these and many
more reveal to you that there is a power and intelligence within you
that far tran-scends your intellect, causing you to marvel at the
wonders of it ail. All these experiences cause you to rejoice and
believe in the miracle-working powers of your own subconscious
mind.
• Your subconscious is your Book of Life
Whatever thoughts, beliefs, opinions, theories, or dogmas you write,
engrave, or impress on your subconscious mind, you shall experience
them as the objective manifestation of circum-stances, conditions, and
events.
What you write on the inside, you will experience on the outside.
You have two sides to your life, objective and subjective, visible and
invisible, thought and its manifestation.
Your brain receives your thought, which is the organ of your
conscious reasoning mind. When your conscious or ob-jective mind
accepts the thought completely, it is sent to the solar plexus, called the
brain of your mind, where it becomes flesh and is made manifest in
your experience.
As previously outlined, your subconscious cannot argue. It acts only
from what you write on it. It accepts your verdict or the conclusions of
your conscious mind as final. This is why you are always writing on
the book of life, because your thoughts become your experiences. The
American essayist, Ralph Waldo Emerson said, “Man is what he
thinks all day long.”
• What is impressed in the subconscious is expressed
William James, the father of American psychology, said that the
power to move the world is in your subconscious mind. Your
subconscious mind is one with infinite intelligence and boundless
wisdom. It is fed by hidden springs, and is called the law of life.
Whatever you impress upon your subconscious mind, the latter will
move heaven and earth to bring it to pass.
42
You must, therefore, impress it with right ideas and construc-tive
thoughts. The reason there is so much chaos and misery in the world is
because people do not understand the interaction of their conscious
and subconscious minds. When these two principles work in accord,
in concord, in peace, and synchronously together, you will have heath,
happiness, peace and joy. There is no sickness or discord when the
conscious and subconscious work together harmoniously and
peacefully.
The tomb of Hermes was opened with great expectancy and a sense
of wonder because people believed that the greatest secret of the ages
was contained therein. The secret was as within, so without; as above,
so below.
In other words, whatever is impressed hi your subconscious mind is
expressed on the screen of space. This same truth was proclaimed by
Moses, Isaiah, Jesus, Buddha, Zoroaster, Laotze, and all the illumined
seers of the ages Whatever you feel as true subjectively is expressed
as conditions, experiences, and events. Motion and emotion must
balance. As in heaven [your own mind], so on earth [in your body and
environment]. This is the great law of life.
You will find throughout all nature the law of action and reaction, of
rest and motion. These two must balance, then there will be harmony
and equilibrium. You are here to let the life principle flow through
you rhythmically and harmoniously. The intake and the outgo must be
equal. The impression and the expression must be equal. All your
frustration is due to unful-filled desire.
If you think negatively, destructively, and viciously, these thoughts
generate destructive emotions which must be expressed and find an
outlet.
These emotions, being of a negative nature, are frequently expressed
as ulcers, heart trouble, tension, and anxieties.
What is your idea or feeling about yourself now? Every part of your
being expresses that idea. Your vitality, body, fi-nancial status,
43
friends, and social status represent a perfect re-flection of the idea you
have of yourself.
This is the real mean-ing of what is impressed in your subconscious
mind, and which is expressed in all phases of your life.
We injure ourselves by the negative ideas, which we enter-tain.
How often have you wounded yourself by getting angry, fearful,
jealous, or vengeful? These are the poisons that enter your
subconscious mind. You were not born with these negative attitudes.
Feed your subconscious mind life-giving thoughts, and you will wipe
out all the negative patterns lodged therein. As you continue to do this,
all the past will be wiped out and remembered no more.
• The subconscious heals a malignancy of the skin
A personal healing will ever be the most convincing evi-dence of
the healing power of the subconscious mind. Over forty years ago I
resolved a malignancy of the skin through prayer. Medical therapy
had failed to check the growth, and it was get-ting progressively
worse.
A clergyman, with a deep psychological knowledge, ex-plained to
me the inner meaning of the 139th Psalm wherein it says, In thy book
all my members were written, which in con-tinuance were fashioned,
when as yet there was none of them. He explained that the term book
meant my subconscious mind, which fashioned and molded all my
organs from an invisible cell. He also pointed out that inasmuch as my
subconscious mind made my body, it could also recreate it and heal it
according to the perfect pattern within it.
This clergyman showed me his watch and said, “This had a maker,
and the watchmaker had to have the idea first in mind before the
watch became an objective reality, and if the watch was out of order,
the watchmaker could fix it.” My friend re-minded me that the
subconscious intelligence, which created my body, was like a
watchmaker, and it also knew exactly how to heal, restore, and direct
all the vital functions and processes of my body, but that I had to give
44
it the perfect idea of health. This would act as cause, and the effect
would be a healing.
I prayed in a very simple way as follows: “My body and all its
organs were created by the infinite intelligence in my sub-conscious
mind. It knows how to heal me. Its wisdom fashioned all my organs,
tissues, muscles, and bones. This infinite healing presence within me
is now transforming every atom of my being making me whole and
perfect now. I give thanks for the healing I know is taking place now.
Wonderful are the works of the creative intelligence within me.”
I prayed aloud for about five minutes two or three times a day
repeating the above simple prayer. In about three months my skin was
whole and perfect.
As you can see, all I did was give life-giving patterns of wholeness,
beauty, and perfection to my subconscious mind, thereby obliterating
the negative images and patterns of thought lodged in my
subconscious mind which were the cause of all my trouble. Nothing
appears on your body except when the mental equivalent is first in
your mind, and as you change your mind by drenching it with
incessant affirmatives, you change your body. This is the basis of all
healing. . . . Marvelous are thy works; and that my soul [subconscious
mind] knoweth right well. PSALM 139:14.
• How the subconscious controls all functions of the body
While you are awake or sound asleep upon your bed, the ceaseless,
tireless action of your subconscious mind controls all the vital
functions of your body without the help of your con-scious mind. For
example, while you are asleep your heart con-tinues to beat
rhythmically, your lungs do not rest, and the proc-ess of inhalation
and exhalation, whereby your blood absorbs fresh air, goes on just the
same as when you are awake. Your subconscious controls your
digestive processes and glandular secretions, as well as all the other
mysterious operations of your body. The hair on your face continues
to grow whether you are asleep or awake. Scientists tell us that the
45
skin secretes much more perspiration during sleep than during the
waking hours.
Your eyes, ears, and other senses are active during sleep. For
instance, many of our great scientists have received answers to
perplexing problems while they were asleep. They saw the an-swers in
a dream.
Oftentimes your conscious mind interferes with the normal rhythm
of the heart, lungs, and functioning of the stomach and intestines by
worry, anxiety, fear, and depression. These pat-terns of thought
interfere with the harmonious functioning of your subconscious mind.
When mentally disturbed, the best procedure is to let go, relax, and
still the wheels of your thought processes.
Speak to your subconscious mind, telling it to take over in peace,
harmony, and divine order. You will find that all the functions of your
body will become normal again. Be sure to speak to your
subconscious mind with authority and convic-tion, and it will conform
to your command.
Your subconscious seeks to preserve your life and restore you to
health at all costs. It causes you to love your children, which also
illustrates an instinctive desire to preserve all life. Let us suppose you
accidentally ate some bad food. Your sub-conscious mind would
cause you to regurgitate it.
If you in-advertently took some poison, your subconscious powers
would proceed to neutralize it. If you completely entrusted yourself to
its wonderworking power, you would be entirely restored to health.
• How to get the subconscious to work for you
The first thing to realize is that your subconscious mind is always
working. It is active night and day, whether you act upon it or not.
Your subconscious is the builder of your body, but you cannot
consciously perceive or hear that inner silent process. Your business is
with your conscious mind and not your subconscious mind. Just keep
your conscious mind busy with the expectation of the best, and make
46
sure the thoughts you habitually think are based on whatsoever things
are lovely, true, just, and of good report. Begin now to take care of
your con-scious mind, knowing in your heart and soul that your
subcon-scious mind is always expressing, reproducing, and
manifesting according to your habitual thinking.
Remember, just as water takes the shape of the pipe it flows
through, the life principle in you flows through you according to the
nature of your thoughts. Claim that the healing presence in your
subconscious is flowing through you as harmony, health, peace, joy,
and abundance. Think of it as a living intelligence, a lovely
companion on the way. Firmly believe it is continually flowing
through you vivifying, inspiring, and prospering you. It will respond
exactly this way. It is done unto you as you believe.
• Healing principle of the subconscious restores atrophied optic
nerves
There is the well-known, duly authenticated case of Madame Bire of
France, recorded in the archives of the medical department of
Lourdes, France. She was blind; the optic nerves were atrophied and
useless. She visited Lourdes and had what she termed a miraculous
healing. Ruth Cranston, a Protestant young lady who investigated and
wrote about healings at Lourdes in McCalls magazine, November,
1955, writes about Madame Bire as follows: “At Lourdes she regained
her sight incredibly, with the optic nerves still lifeless and useless, as
several doctors could testify after repeated examinations. A month
later, upon re-examination, it was found that the seeing mechanism
had been restored to normal. But at first, so far as medical
examination could tell, she was seeing with ‘dead eyes.’”
I have visited Lourdes several times where I, too, wit-nessed some
healings, and of course, as we shall explain in the next chapter, there
is no doubt that healings take place at many shrines throughout the
world, Christian and non-Christian.
47
The waters of the shrine did not heal Madame Bire, to whom we
just referred, but by her own subconscious mind, which responded to
her belief.
The healing principle within her subconscious mind responded to
the nature of her thought. Be-lief is a thought in the subconscious
mind. It means to accept something as true. The thought accepted
executes itself automatically.
Undoubtedly, Madame Bire went to the shrine with expectancy and
great faith, knowing in her heart she would re-ceive a healing. Her
subconscious mind responded accordingly, releasing the ever-present
healing forces. The subconscious mind, which created the eye, can
certainly bring a dead nerve back to life. What the creative principle
created, it can recreate. Accord-ing to your belief is it done unto you.
• How to convey the idea of perfect health to your subconscious
mind
A Protestant minister I knew in Johannesburg, South Africa, told me
the method he used to convey the idea of perfect health to his
subconscious mind. He had cancer of the lung. His technique, as given
to me in his own handwriting, is ex-actly as follows: “Several times a
day I would make certain that I was completely relaxed mentally and
physically. I relaxed my body by speaking to it as follows, ‘My feet
are relaxed, my ankles are relaxed, my legs are relaxed, my abdominal
muscles are relaxed, my heart and lungs are relaxed, my head is
relaxed, my whole being is completely relaxed.’ After about five
minutes I would be in a sleepy drowsy state, and then I affirmed the
fol-lowing truth, ‘the perfection of God is now being expressed
through me. The idea of perfect health is now filling my subconscious mind. The image God has of me is a perfect image, and my
subconscious mind recreates my body in perfect accord-ance with the
perfect image held in the mind of God.’” This minister had a
remarkable healing. This is a simple easy way of conveying the idea
of perfect health to your subconscious mind.
48
Another wonderful way to convey the idea of health to your
subconscious is through disciplined or scientific imagina-tion. I told a
man who was suffering from functional paralysis to make a vivid
picture of himself walking around in his office, touching the desk,
answering the telephone, and doing all the things he ordinarily would
do if he were healed.
I explained to him that this idea and mental picture of perfect health
would be accepted by his subconscious mind.
He lived the role and actually felt himself back in the office. He
knew that he was giving his subconscious mind some-thing definite to
work upon.
His subconscious mind was the film upon which the picture was
impressed.
One day, after several weeks of frequent conditioning of the mind
with this mental pic-ture, the telephone rang by prearrangement and
kept ringing while his wife and nurse were out. The telephone was
about twelve feet away, but nevertheless he managed to answer it. He
was healed at that hour.
The healing power of his subconscious mind responded to his
mental imagery, and a healing followed.
This man had a mental block, which prevented impulses from the
brain reaching his legs; therefore, he said he could not walk. When he
shifted his attention to the healing power within him, the power
flowed through, his focused attention, enabling him to walk.
Whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, believing, ye shall receive.
MATT. 21:22.
• Ideas worth remembering
1. Your subconscious mind controls all the vital processes of your
body and knows the answer to all problems.
2. Prior to sleep, turn over a specific request to your subcon-scious
mind and prove its miracle-working power to yourself.
49
3. Whatever you impress on your subconscious mind is ex-pressed
on the screen of space as conditions, experiences, and events.
Therefore, you should carefully watch all ideas and thoughts
entertained in your
conscious mind.
4. The law of action and reaction is universal. Your thought is
action, and the reaction is the automatic response of your
subconscious mind to your thought. Watch your thoughts!
5. All frustration is due to unfulfilled desires. If you dwell on
obstacles, delays, and difficulties, your subconscious mind responds
accordingly, and you are blocking your own good.
6. The Life Principle will flow through you rhythmically and
harmoniously if you consciously affirm: “I believe that the
subconscious power which gave me this desire is now fulfill-ing it
through me.” This dissolves all conflicts.
7. You can interfere with the normal rhythm of your heart, lungs,
and other organs by worry, anxiety, and fear. Feed your subconscious
with thoughts of harmony, health, and peace, and all the functions of
your body will become nor-mal again.
8. Keep your conscious mind busy with the expectation of the best,
and your subconscious will faithfully reproduce your habitual
thinking.
9. Imagine the happy ending or solution to your problem, feel the
thrill of accomplishment, and what you imagine and feel will be
accepted by your subconscious mind and bring it to pass.
50
4
Mental Healings in Ancient Times
Down through the ages men of all nations have somehow
instinctively believed that somewhere there resided a healing power
which could restore to normal the functions and sensa-tions of man’s
body. They believed that this strange power could be invoked under
certain conditions, and that the alleviation of human suffering would
follow. The history of all nations presents testimony in support of this
belief.
In the early history of the world the power of secretly in-fluencing
men for good or evil, including the healing of the sick, was said to be
possessed by the priests and holy men of all nations. Healing of the
sick was supposed to be a power derived directly by them from God,
and the procedures and processes of healing varied throughout the
world. The healing processes took the form of supplications to God
attended by various cere-monies, such as the laying on of hands,
incantations, the applica-tion of amulets, talismans, rings, relics, and
images.
For example, in the religions of antiquity priests in the ancient
temples gave drugs to the patient and practiced hypnotic suggestions
prior to the patient’s sleep, telling him that the gods would visit him in
his sleep and heal him. Many healings fol-lowed. Obviously, all this
was the work of potent suggestions to the subconscious mind.
After the performance of certain mysterious rites, the de-votees of
Hecate would see the goddess during sleep, provided that before going
to sleep they had prayed to her according to weird and fantastic
instructions.
They were told to mix lizards with resin, frankincense, and myrrh,
and pound all this together in the open air under the crescent moon.
Healings were reported in many cases following this grotesque
procedure.
51
It is obvious that these strange procedures, as mentioned in the
illustrations given, favored suggestion and acceptance by the
subconscious mind of these people by making a powerful appeal to
their imagination.
Actually, in all these healings, the sub-conscious mind of the subject
was the healer.
In all ages unofficial healers have obtained remarkable re-sults in
cases where authorized medical skill has failed. This gives cause for
thought. How do these healers in all parts of the world effect their
cures? The answer to all these healings is due to the blind belief of the
sick person, which released the healing power resident in his
subconscious mind. Many of the remedies andmethods employed
were rather strange and fantastic which fired the imagination of the
patients, causing an aroused emo-tional state. This state of mind
facilitated the suggestion of health, and was accepted both by the
conscious and subconscious mind of the sick. This will be elaborated
on further in the next chapter.
• Biblical accounts on the use of the subconscious powers
What things soever ye desire, when ye pray believe that ye receive
them, and ye shall have them. MARK 11:24.
Note the difference in tenses. The inspired writer tells us to believe
and accept as true the fact that our desire has already been
accomplished and fulfilled, that it is already completed, and that its
realization will follow as a thing in the future.
The success of this technique depends on the confident conviction
that the thought, the idea, the picture is already a fact in mind. In order
for anything to have substance in the realm of mind, it must be
thought of as actually existing there.
Here in a few cryptic words is a concise and specific direc-tion for
making use of the creative power of thought by im-pressing upon the
subconscious the particular thing, which you desire. Your thought,
idea, plan, or purpose is as real on its own plane as your hand or your
52
heart. In following the Biblical tech-nique, you completely eliminate
from your mind all considera-tion of conditions, circumstances, or
anything, which might im-ply adverse contingencies. You are planting
a seed (concept) in the mind, which, if you leave it undisturbed, will
infallibly germinate into external fruition.
The prime condition, which Jesus insisted upon, was faith. Over and
over again you read in the Bible, According to your faith is it done
unto you.
If you plant certain types of seeds in the ground, you have faith they
will grow after their kind. This is the way of seeds, and trusting the
laws of growth and agricul-ture, you know that the seeds will come
forth after their kind. Faith as mentioned in the Bible is a way of
thinking, an attitude of mind, an inner certitude, knowing that the idea
you fully accept in your conscious mind will be embodied in your subconscious mind and made manifest. Faith is, in a sense, accept-ing as
true what your reason and senses deny, i.e., a shutting out of the little,
rational, analytical, conscious mind and embracing an attitude of
complete reliance on the inner power of your subconscious mind.
A classical instance of Bible technique is recorded in MATTHEW
9:28-30. And when he was come into the house, the blind men came to
him: and Jesus saith unto them, Believe ye that I am able to do this?
They said unto him, Yea, Lord. Then touched he their eyes, saying,
according to your faith be it unto you. And their eyes were opened;
and Jesus straitly charged them, saying, see that no man know it.
In the words according to your faith be it unto you, you can see that
Jesus was actually appealing to the co-operation of the subconscious
mind of the blind men. Their faith was their great expectancy, their
inner feeling, their inner conviction that something miraculous would
happen, and that their prayer would be answered, and it was. This is
the time-honored technique of healing, utilized alike by all healing
groups throughout the world regardless of religious affiliation.
In the words see that no man know it, Jesus enjoins the newly
healed
53
patients not to discuss their healing because they might be subjected
to the skeptical and derogatory criticisms of the unbelieving. This
might tend to undo the benefits they had received at the hand of Jesus
by depositing thoughts of fear, doubt, and anxiety in the subconscious
mind ... for with authority and power he commandeth the un-clean
spirits, and they came out. LUKE 4:36.
When the sick came to Jesus to be healed, they were healed by their
faith together with his faith and understanding of the healing power of
the subconscious mind. Whatever he decreed, he felt inwardly to be
true. He and the people needing help were in the one universal
subjective mind, and his silent inner know-ing and conviction of the
healing power changed the negative destructive patterns in the
patients’ subconscious. The resultant healings were the automatic
response to the internal mental change. His command was his appeal
to the subconscious mind of the patients plus his awareness, feeling,
and absolute trust in the response of the subconscious mind to the
words which he spoke with authority.
• Miracles at various shrines throughout the world
It is an established fact that cures have taken place at various shrines
throughout the world, such as in Japan, India, Europe, and America. I
have visited several of the famous shrines in Japan. At the world
famous shrine called Diabutsu is a gigantic divinity of bronze where
Buddha is seated with folded hands, and the head is inclined in an
attitude of profound contemplative ecstasy. It is 42 feet in height and
is called the great Buddha.
Here I saw young and old making offerings at its feet. Money, fruit,
rice, and oranges were offered. Candles were lit, incense was burned,
and prayers of petition recited.
The guide explained the chant of a young girl as she mur-mured a
prayer, bowed low, and placed two oranges as an offer-ing. She also
lit a candle. He said she had lost her voice, and it was restored at the
shrine. She was thanking Buddha for restor-ing her voice. She had the
simple faith that Buddha would give her back her singing voice if she
54
followed a certain ritual, fasted, and made certain offerings. All this
helped to kindle faith and expectancy, resulting in a conditioning of
her mind to the point of belief. Her subconscious mind responded to
her belief.
To illustrate further the power of imagination and blind belief I will
relate the case of a relative of mine who had tuber-culosis. His lungs
were badly diseased. His son decided to heal his father. He came
home to Perth, Western Australia, where his father lived, and said to
him that he had met a monk who had returned from one of the healing
shrines in Europe. This monk sold him a piece of the true cross. He
said that he gave the monk the equivalent of $500 for it.
This young man had actually picked up a splinter of wood from the
sidewalk, went to the jeweler’s, and had it set in a ring so that it
looked real.
He told his father that just touching the ring or the cross-healed
many. He inflamed and fired his father’s imagination to the point that
the old gentleman snatched the ring from him, placed it over his chest,
prayed silently, and went to sleep. In the morning he was healed. All
the clinic’s tests proved negative.
You know, of course, it was not the splinter of wood from the
sidewalk that healed him. It was his imagination aroused to an intense
degree, plus the confident expectancy of a perfect healing.
Imagination was joined to faith or subjective feeling, and the union of
the two brought about a healing. The father never learned of the trick
that had been played upon him. If he had, he probably would have had
a relapse. He remained com-pletely cured and passed away fifteen
years later at the age of 89.
• One universal healing principle
It is a well-known fact that all of the various schools of healing
effect cures of the most wonderful character. The most obvious
conclusion, which strikes your mind, is that there must be some
underlying principle, which is common to them all, namely, the
subconscious mind, and the one process of healing is faith.
55
It will now be in order to recall to your mind z once more the
following fundamental truths:
First that you possess mental functions, which have been
distinguished by designating one the conscious mind and the other the
subconscious mind.
Secondly, your subconscious mind is constantly amenable to the
power of suggestion. Furthermore, your subconscious mind has
complete control of the functions, conditions, and sensations of your
body.
I venture to believe that all the readers of this book are familiar with
the fact that symptoms of almost any disease can be induced in
hypnotic subjects by suggestion. For example, a subject in the
hypnotic state can develop a high temperature, flushed face, or chills
according to the nature of the suggestion given. By experiment, you
can suggest to the person that he is paralyzed and cannot walk: it will
be so. By illustration, you can hold a cup of cold water under the nose
of the hypnotic subject and tell him, “This is full of pepper; smell it!”
He will proceed to sneeze. What do you think caused him to sneeze,
the water or the suggestion?
If a man says he is allergic to Timothy grass, you can place a
synthetic flower or an empty glass in front of his nose, when he is in a
hypnotic state, and tell him it is Timothy grass. He will portray the
usual allergic symptoms.
This indicates that the cause of the disease is in the mind. The
healing of the disease can also take place mentally.
You realize that remarkable healings take place through osteopathy,
chiropractic medicine, and naturopathy, as well as through all the
various religious bodies throughout the world, but it is obvious that all
of these healings are brought about through the subconscious mind—
the only healer there is.
Notice how it heals a cut on your face caused by shaving. It knows
exactly how to do it. The doctor dresses the wound and says, “Nature
56
heals it!” Nature refers to natural law, the law of the subconscious
mind, or selfpreservation, which is the function of the subconscious
mind. The instinct of self-preserva-tion is the first law of nature. Your
strongest instinct is the most potent of all autosuggestions.
• Widely different theories
It would be tedious and unprofitable to discuss to any great extent
the numerous theories advanced by different religious sects and prayer
therapy groups. There are a great number who claim that because their
theory produces results it is, therefore, the correct one. This, as
explained in this chapter, cannot be true.
You are aware that there are all types of healing. Franz Anton
Mesmer, an Austrian physician (1734-1815) who prac-ticed in Paris,
discovered that by applying magnets to the dis-eased body, he could
cure that disease miraculously. He also performed cures with various
other pieces of glass and metals. He discontinued this form of healing
and claimed that his cures were due to “animal magnetism,”
theorizing that this substance was projected from the healer to the
patient.
His method of treating disease from then on was by hyp-notism,
which was called mesmerism in his day. Other physicians said that all
his healings were due to suggestion and nothing else.
All of these groups, such as psychiatrists, psychologists, osteopaths,
chiropractors, physicians, and all the churches are using the one
universal power resident in the subconscious mind. Each may
proclaim the healings are due to their theory. The process of all
healing is a definite, positive, mental attitude, an inner attitude, or a
way of thinking, called faith. Healing is due to a confident expectancy,
which acts as a powerful sugges-tion to the subconscious mind
releasing its healing potency.
One man does not heal by a different power than another. It is true
he may have his own theory or method. There is only one process of
healing and that is faith. There is only one heal-ing power, namely,
57
your subconscious mind. Select the theory and method you prefer.
You can rest assured, if you have faith, you shall get results.
• Views of Paracelsus
Philippus Paracelsus, a famous Swiss alchemist and physi-cian, who
lived from 1493 to 1541, was a great healer in his day. He stated what
is now an obvious scientific fact when he uttered these words,
“Whether the object of your faith be real or false, you will
nevertheless obtain the same effects. Thus, if I believed in Saint
Peter’s statue as I should have believed in Saint Peter himself, I shall
obtain the same effects that I should have obtained from Saint Peter.
But that is superstition. Faith, however, produces miracles; and
whether it is true or false faith, it will always produce the same
wonders.”
The views of Paracelsus were also entertained in the six-teenth
century by Pietro Pomponazzi, an Italian philosopher and
contemporary of Paracelsus, who said, “We can easily conceive the
marvelous effects which confidence and imagination can produce,
particularly when both qualities are reciprocated be-tween the subjects
and the person who influences them.
The cures attributed to the influence of certain relics are the effect of
their imagination and confidence. Quacks and philosophers know that
if the bones of any skeleton were put in place of the saint’s bones, the
sick would none the less experience beneficial effects, if they believed
that they were veritable relics.”
Then, if you believe in the bones of saints to heal, or if you believe
in the healing power of certain waters, you will gel results because of
the powerful suggestion given to your sub-conscious mind. It is the
latter that does the healing.
58
• Bernheitn’s experiments
Hippolyte Bernheim, professor of medicine at Nancy, France, 1910-
1919, was the expounder of the fact that the suggestion of the
physician to the patient was exerted through the subconscious mind.
Bernheim, in his Suggestive Therapeutics, page 197, tells a story of
a man with paralysis of the tongue which had yielded to no form of
treatment.
His doctor told the patient that he had a new instrument with which
he promised to heal him. He introduced a pocket thermometer into the
patient’s mouth. The patient imagined it to be the instrument, which
was to save him. In a few moments he cried out joyfully that he could
once more move his tongue freely.
“Among our cases,” continues Bernheim, “facts of the same sort
will be found. A young girl came into my office, hav-ing suffered
from complete loss of speech for nearly four weeks. After making sure
of the diagnosis, I told my students that loss of speech sometimes
yielded instantly to electricity, which might act simply by its
suggestive influence. I sent for the induction apparatus. I applied my
hand over the larynx and moved a little, and said, ‘Now you can speak
aloud.’ In an instant I made her saw ‘a,’ then ‘b,’ then ‘Maria.’ She
continued to speak distinctly; the loss of voice had disappeared.”
Here Bernheim is showing the power of faith and expect-ancy on
the part of the patient, which acts as a powerful sugges-tion to the
subconscious mind.
• Producing a blister by suggestion
Bernheim states that he produced a blister on the back of a patient’s
neck by applying a postage stamp and suggesting to the patient that it
was a fly-plaster. This has been confirmed by the experiments and
experiences of many doctors in many parts of the world, which leave
no doubt that structural change, are a possible result of oral suggestion
to patients.
59
• The cause of bloody stigmata
In Hudson’s Law of Psychic Phenomena, page 153, he states,
“Hemorrhages and bloody stigmata may be induced in certain subjects
by means of suggestion.
“Dr. M. Bourru put a subject into the somnambulistic con-dition,
and gave him the following suggestion: ‘At four o’clock this
afternoon, after the hypnosis, you will come into my office, sit down
in the armchair, cross your arms upon your breast, and your nose will
begin to bleed.’ At the hour appointed the young man did as directed.
Several drops of blood came from the left nostril.
 “On another occasion the same investigator traced the pa-tient’s
name on both his forearms with the dull point of an instru-ment. Then
when the patient was in the somnambulistic con-dition, he said, ‘At
four o’clock this afternoon you will go to sleep, and your arms will
bleed along the lines which I have traced, and your name will appear
written on your arms in letters of blood.’ He was watched at four
o’clock and seen to fall asleep. On the left arm the letters stood out in
bright relief, and in several places there were drops of blood. The
letters were still visible three months afterward, although they had
gradu-ally grown faint.”
These facts demonstrate at once the correctness of the two
fundamental propositions previously stated, namely, the con-stant
amenability of the subconscious mind to the power of suggestion and
the perfect control, which the subconscious mind exercises, over the
functions, sensations, and conditions of the body.
All the foregoing phenomena dramatize vividly abnormal conditions
induced by suggestion, and are conclusive proof that as a man
thinketh in his heart [subconscious mind] so is he.
• Healing points in review
1. Remind yourself frequently that the healing power is in your own
subconscious mind.
60
2. Know that faith is like a seed planted in the ground; it grows after
its kind. Plant the idea (seed) in your mind, water and fertilize it with
expectancy, and it will manifest.
3. The idea you have for a book, new invention, or play is real in
your mind. This is why you can believe you have it now. Believe in
the reality of your idea, plan, or invention, and as you do, it will
become manifest.
4. In praying for another, know that your silent inner knowing of
wholeness, beauty, and perfection can change the nega-tive patterns of
the other’s subconscious mind and bring about wonderful results.
5. The miraculous healings you hear about at various shrines are due
to imagination and blind faith which act on the subconscious mind,
releasing the healing power.
6. All disease originates in the mind. Nothing appears on the body
unless there is a mental pattern corresponding to it.
7. The symptoms of almost any disease can be induced in you by
hypnotic suggestion. This shows you the power of your thought.
8. There is only one process of healing and that is faith. There is
only one healing power, namely, your subconscious mind.
9. Whether the object of your faith is real or false, you will get
results. Your subconscious mind responds to the thought in your mind.
Look upon faith as a thought in your mind, and that will suffice.
61
5
Mental Healings in Modern Times
Everyone is definitely concerned with the healing of bodily
conditions and human affairs. What is it that heals? Where is this
healing power? These are questions asked by everyone. The answer is
that this healing power is ha the subconscious mind of each person,
and a changed mental attitude on the part of the sick person releases
this healing power.
No mental or religious science practitioner, psychologist,
psychiatrist, or medical doctor ever healed a patient. There is an old
saying, “The doctor dresses the wound, but God heals it.” The
psychologist or psychiatrist proceeds to remove the mental blocks in
the patient so that the healing principle may be re-leased, restoring the
patient to health. Likewise, the surgeon removes the physical block
enabling the healing currents to function normally. No physician,
surgeon, or mental science practitioner claims, “he healed the patient.”
The one healing power is called by many names—Nature, Life, God,
Creative Intelligence, and Subconscious Power.
As previously outlined, there are many different methods used to
remove the mental, emotional, and physical blocks which inhibit the
flow of the healing life principle animating all of us. The healing
principle resident in your subconscious mind can and will, if properly
directed by you or some other person, heal your mind and body of all
disease. This healing principle is operative in all men regardless of
creed, color, or race. You do not have to belong to some particular
church in order to use and participate in this healing process. Your
subconscious will heal the burn or cut on your hand even though you
profess to be an atheist or agnostic.
The modern mental therapeutic procedure is based on the truth that
the infinite intelligence and power of your subcon-scious mind
responds according to your faith. The mental science practitioner or
minister follows the injunction of the Bible, i.e., he goes into his closet
62
and shuts the door, which means he stills his mind, relaxes, lets go,
and thinks of the infinite healing presence within him. He closes the
door of his mind to all out-side distractions as well as appearances,
and then he quietly and knowingly turns over his request or desire to
his subcon-scious mind, realizing that the intelligence of his mind will
answer him according to his specific needs.
The most wonderful thing to know is this: Imagine the end desired
and feel its reality; then the infinite life principle will respond to your
conscious choice and your conscious request. This is the meaning of
believe you have received, and you shall receive. This is what the
modern mental scientist does when he practices prayer therapy.
• One process of healing
There is only one universal healing principle operating through
everything—the cat, the dog, the tree, the grass, the wind, the earth—
for everything is alive. This life principle op-erates through the
animal, vegetable, and mineral kingdoms as instinct and the law of
growth. Man is consciously aware of this life principle, and he can
consciously direct it to bless himself in countless ways.
There are many different approaches, techniques, and methods in
using the universal power, but there is only one process of healing,
which is faith, for according to your faith is it done unto you.
• The law of belief
All religions of the world represent forms of belief, and these beliefs
are explained in many ways. The law of life is belief. What do you
believe about yourself, life, and the universe? It is done unto you, as
you believe.
Belief is a thought in your mind, which causes the power of your
subconscious to be distributed into all phases of your life according to
your thinking habits. You must realize the Bible is not talking about
your belief in some ritual, ceremony, form, institution, man, or
formula. It is talking about belief itself. The belief of your mind is
63
simply the thought of your mind. If thou canst believe, all things are
possible to him that believeth. MARK 9:23.
It is foolish to believe in something to hurt or harm you. Remember,
it is not the thing believed in that hurts or harms you, but the belief or
thought in your mind, which creates the result. All your experiences,
all your actions, and all the events and circumstances of your life are
but the reflections and reac-tions to your own thought.
• Prayer therapy is the combined function of the con-scious and
subconscious mind scientifically directed
Prayer therapy is the synchronized, harmonious, and in-telligent
function of the conscious and subconscious levels of mind specifically
directed for a definite purpose. In scientific prayer or prayer therapy,
you must know what you are doing and why you are doing it. You
trust the law of healing. Prayer therapy is sometimes referred to as
mental treatment, and an-other term is scientific prayer.
In prayer therapy you consciously choose a certain idea, mental
picture, or plan which you desire to experience. You realize your
capacity to convey this idea or mental image to your subconscious by
feeling the reality of the state assumed. As you remain faithful in your
mental attitude, your prayer will be answered. Prayer therapy is a
definite mental action for a definite specific purpose.
Let us suppose that you decide to heal a certain difficulty by prayer
therapy. You are aware that your problem or sickness, whatever it
may be, must be caused by negative thoughts charged with fear and
lodged in your subconscious mind, and that if you can succeed in
cleansing your mind of these thoughts, you will get a healing.
You, therefore, turn to the healing power within your own
subconscious mind and remind yourself of its infinite power and
intelligence and its capacity to heal all conditions. As you dwell on
these truths, your fear will begin to dissolve, and the recollection of
these truths also corrects the erroneous beliefs.
64
You give thanks for the healing that you know will come, and then
you keep your mind off the difficulty until you feel guided, after an
interval, to pray again. While you are praying, you absolutely refuse to
give any power to the negative con-ditions or to admit for a second
that the healing will not come. This attitude of mind brings about the
harmonious union of the conscious and subconscious mind, which
releases the healing power.
• Faith healing, what it means, and how blind faith works
What is popularly termed faith healing is not the faith mentioned in
the Bible, which means knowledge of the inter-action of the conscious
and subconscious mind. A faith healer is one who heals without any
real scientific understanding of the powers and forces involved. He
may claim that he has a special gift of healing, and the sick person’s
blind belief in him or his powers may bring results.
The voodoo doctor in South Africa and other parts of the world may
heal by incantations, or touching the so-called bones of saints, or
anything else may heal a person, which cause the patients to honestly
believe in the method or process.
Any method, which causes you to move from fear and worry to faith
and expectancy, will heal. There are many persons, each of whom
claims that because his personal theory produces re-sults, it is,
therefore, the correct one. This, as already explained in this chapter,
cannot be true.
To illustrate how blind faith works: You will recall our dis-cussion
of the Swiss physician, Franz Anton Mesmer. In 1776 he claimed
many cures when he stroked diseased bodies with artificial magnets.
Later on he threw away his magnets and evolved the theory of animal
magnetism. This he held to be a fluid, which pervades the universe,
but is most active in the human organism.
He claimed that this magnetic fluid, which was going forth from
him to his patients, healed them. People flocked to him, and many
wonderful cures were affected.
65
Mesmer moved to Paris, and while there the Government appointed
a commission composed of physicians and members of the Academy
of Science, of which Benjamin Franklin was a member, to investigate
his cures.
The report admitted the lead-ing facts claimed by Mesmer, but held
that there was no evidence to prove the correctness of his magnetic
fluid theory, and said the effects were due to the imagination of the
patients.
Soon after this, Mesmer was driven into exile, and died in 1815.
Shortly afterwards, Dr. Braid of Manchester undertook to show that
magnetic fluid had nothing to do with the produc-tion of the healings
of Dr. Mesmer. Dr. Braid discovered that patients could be thrown
into hypnotic sleep by suggestion, dur-ing which many of the wellknown phenomena ascribed to mag-netism by Mesmer could be
produced.
You can readily see that all these cures were undoubtedly brought
about by the active imagination of the patients together with a
powerful suggestion of health to their subconscious minds. All this
could be termed blind faith, as there was no understand-ing in those
days as to how the cures were brought about.
• Subjective faith and what it means
You will recall the proposition, which need not be repeated at
length, that the subjective or subconscious mind of an indi-vidual is as
amenable to the control of his own conscious or objective mind as it is
by the suggestions of another. It follows that whatever may be your
objective belief, if you will assume to have faith actively or passively,
your subconscious mind will be controlled by the suggestion, and your
desire will be fulfilled.
The faith required in mental healings is a purely subjective faith,
and it is attainable upon the cessation of active opposition on the part
of the objective or conscious mind.
66
In the healing of the body it is, of course, desirable to se-cure the
concurrent faith of both the conscious and subconscious mind.
However, it is not always essential if you will enter into a state of
passivity and receptivity by relaxing the mind and the body and
getting into a sleepy state. In this drowsy state your passivity becomes
receptive to subjective impression.
Recently, I was asked by a man, “How is it that I got a healing
through a minister? I did not believe what he said when, he told me
that there is no such thing as disease and that matter does not exist.”
This man at first thought his intelligence was being in-sulted, and he
protested against such a palpable absurdity. The explanation is simple.
He was quieted by soothing words and told to get into a perfectly
passive condition, to say nothing, and think of nothing for the time
being. His minister also became passive, and affirmed quietly,
peacefully, and constantly for about one half hour that this man would
have perfect health, peace, harmony, and wholeness. He felt immense
relief and was restored to health.
It is easy to see that his subjective faith had been made manifest by
his passivity under treatment, and the suggestions of perfect
healthfulness by the minister were conveyed to his sub-conscious
mind. The two subjective minds were then en rapport.
The minister was not handicapped by antagonistic auto-suggestions
of the patient arising from objective doubt of the power of the healer
or the correctness of the theory. In this sleepy, drowsy state the
conscious mind resistance is reduced to a minimum, and results
followed. The subconscious mind of the patient being necessarily
controlled by such suggestion exercised its functions in accordance
therewith, and a healing followed.
• The meaning of absent treatment
Suppose you learned that your mother was sick in New York City
and you lived in Los Angeles. Your mother would not be physically
present where you are, but you could pray for her. It is the Father
within which doeth the work.
67
The creative law of mind (subconscious mind) serves you and will
do the work. Its response to you is automatic. Your treatment is for the
purpose of inducing an inner realization of health and harmony in
your mentality.
This inner realization, acting through the subconscious mind,
operates through your mother’s subconscious mind as there is but one
creative mind.
Your thoughts of health, vitality, and perfection operate through the
one universal subjective mind, and set a law in motion on the
subjective side of life, which manifests through her body as a healing.
In the mind principle there is no time or space. It is the same mind
that operates through your mother no matter where she may be. In
reality there is no absent treatment as opposed to present treatment for
the universal mind is omnipresent. You do not try to send out thoughts
or hold a thought. Your treat-ment is a conscious movement of
thought, and as you become conscious of the qualities of health, wellbeing, and relaxation, these qualities will be resurrected in the
experience of your mother, and results will follow.
The following is a perfect example of what is called absent
treatment.
Recently, a listener of our radio program in Los Angeles prayed as
follows for her mother in New York who had a coronary thrombosis:
“The healing presence is right where my mother is. Her bodily
condition is but a reflection of her thought-life like shadows cast on
the screen. I know that in order to change the images on the screen I
must change the projection reel. My mind is the projection reel, and I
now project in my own mind the image of wholeness, harmony, and
perfect health for my mother. The infinite healing presence, which
created my mother’s body and all her organs is now saturating every
atom of her being, and a river of peace, flows through every cell of her
body. The doctors are divinely guided and directed, and whoever
touches my mother is guided to do the right thing. I know that disease
has no ultimate reality; if it had, no one could be healed. I now align
68
myself with the infinite principle of love and life, and I know and
decree that harmony, health, and peace are now being expressed in my
mother’s body.”
She prayed in the above manner several times daily, and her mother
had a most remarkable recovery after a few days, much to the
amazement of her specialist. He complimented her on her great faith
in the power of God.
The conclusion arrived at in the daughter’s mind set the creative law
of mind in motion on the subjective side of life, which manifested
itself through her mother’s body as perfect health and harmony. What
the daughter felt as true about her mother was simultaneously
resurrected in the experience of her mother.
• Releasing the kinetic action of the subconscious mind
A psychologist friend of mine told me that one of his lungs was
infected. X rays and analysis showed the presence of tuber-culosis. At
night before going to sleep he would quietly affirm, “Every cell,
nerve, tissue, and muscle of my lungs are now being made whole,
pure, and perfect. My whole body is being restored to health and
harmony.”
These are not his exact words, but they represent the es-sence of
what he affirmed. A complete healing followed in about a month’s
time. Subsequent X rays showed a perfect healing.
I wanted to know his method, so I asked him why he re-peated the
words prior to sleep. Here is his reply, “The kinetic action of the
subconscious mind continues throughout your sleep-time period.
Hence, give the subconscious mind something good to work on as you
drop off into slumber.” This was a very wise answer. In thinking of
harmony and perfect health, he never mentioned his trouble by name.
I strongly suggest that you cease talking about your ail-ments or
giving them a name. The only sap from which they draw life is your
attention and fear of them. Like the above-mentioned psychologist,
69
become a mental surgeon. Then your troubles will be cut off like dead
branches are pruned from a tree.
If you are constantly naming your aches and symptoms, you inhibit
the kinetic action, which means the release of the healing power and
energy of your subconscious mind. Further-more, by the law of your
own mind, these imaginings tend to take shape, as the thing I greatly
feared. Fill your mind with the great truths of life and walk forward in
the light of love.
• Summary of your aids to health
1. Find out what it is that heals you. Realize that correct direc-tions
given to your subconscious mind will heal your mind and body.
2. Develop a definite plan for turning over your requests or desires
to your subconscious mind.
3. Imagine the end desired and feel its reality. Follow it through, and
you will get definite results.
4. Decide what belief is. Know that belief is a thought in your mind,
and what you think you create.
5. It is foolish to believe in sickness and something to hurt or to
harm you. Believe in perfect health, prosperity, peace, wealth, and
divine
guidance.
6. Great and noble thoughts upon which you habitually dwell
become great acts.
7. Apply the power of prayer therapy in your life. Choose a certain
plan, idea, or mental picture. Mentally and emo-tionally unite with
that idea, and as you remain faithful to your mental attitude, your
prayer will be answered.
8. Always remember, if you really want the power to heal, you can
have it through faith, which means knowledge of the working of your
conscious and subconscious mind. Faith comes with understanding.
70
9. Blind faith means that a person may get results in healing without
any scientific understanding of the powers and forces involved.
10. Learn to pray for your loved ones who may be ill. Quiet your
mind, and your thoughts of health, vitality, and per-fection operating
through the one universal subjective mind will be felt and resurrected
in the mind of your loved one.
71
6
Practical Techniques in Mental
Healings
An engineer has a technique and a process for building a bridge or
an engine. Like the engineer, your mind also has a technique for
governing, controlling, and directing your life. You must realize that
methods and techniques are primary.
In building the Golden Gate Bridge, the chief engineer understood
mathematical principles, stresses and strains. Sec-ondly, he had a
picture of the ideal bridge across the bay. The third step was his
application of tried and proven methods by which the principles were
implemented until the bridge took form and we drive on it. There also
are techniques and methods by which your prayers are answered. If
your prayer is answered, there is a way in which it is answered, and
this is a scientific way. Nothing happens by chance. This is a world of
law and order. In this chapter you will find practical techniques for the
unfolding and nurture of your spiritual life. Your prayers must not
remain up in the air like a balloon. They must go somewhere and
accomplish something in your life.
When we come to analyze prayer we discover there are many
different approaches and methods. We will not consider in this book
the formal, ritual prayers used in religious services. These have
important place in-group worship. We are imme-diately concerned
with the methods of personal prayer as it is applied in your daily life
and as it is used to help others.
Prayer is the formulation of an idea concerning something we wish
to accomplish. Prayer is the soul’s sincere desire. Your desire is your
prayer. It comes out of your deepest needs and it reveals the things
you want in life. Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after
righteousness: for they shall be filled. That is really prayer, life’s
72
hunger and thirst for peace, harmony, health, joy, and all the other
blessings of life.
• The passing-over technique for impregnating the subconscious
This consists essentially in inducing the subconscious mind to take
over your request as handed it by the conscious mind. This passing
over is best accomplished in the reverie-like state. Know that in your
deeper mind are Infinite Intelligence and In-finite Power. Just calmly
think over what you want; see it com-ing into fuller fruition from this
moment forward. Be like the little girl who had a very bad cough and
a sore throat. She de-clared firmly and repeatedly, “It is passing away
now. It is pass-ing away now.” It passed away in about an hour. Use
this tech-nique with complete simplicity and naïveté.
• Your subconscious will accept your blueprint
If you were building a new home for yourself and family, you know
that- you would be intensely interested in regard to the blueprint for
your home; you would see to it that the builders conformed to the
blueprint. You would watch the material and select only the best
wood, steel, in fact, the best of everything. What about your mental
home and your mental blueprint for happiness and abundance? All
your experiences and everything that enters into your life depend upon
the nature of the mental building blocks, which you use in the
construction of your mental home.
If your blueprint is full of mental patterns of fear, worry, anxiety, or
lack, and if you are despondent, doubtful, and cyni-cal, then the
texture of the mental material you are weaving into your mind will
come forth as more toil, care, tension, anxiety, and limitation of all
kinds.
The most fundamental and the most far-reaching activity in life is
that which you build into your mentality every waking hour. Your
word is silent and invisible; nevertheless, it is real.
You are building your mental home all the time, and your thought
and mental imagery represent your blueprint. Hour by hour, moment
73
by moment, you can build radiant health, success, and happiness by
the thoughts you think, the ideas which you harbor, the beliefs that
you accept, and the scenes that you re-hearse in the hidden studio of
your mind. This stately mansion, upon the construction of which you
are perpetually engaged, is your personality, your identity in this
plane, your whole life story on this earth.
Get a new blueprint; build silently by realizing peace, har-mony,
joy, and good will in the present moment. By dwelling upon these
things and claiming them, your subconscious will accept your
blueprint and bring all these things to pass. By their fruits ye shall
know them.
• The science and art of true prayer
The term “science” means knowledge, which is co-ordi-nated,
arranged, and systematized. Let us think of the science and art of true
prayer as it deals with the fundamental principles of life and the
techniques and processes by which they can be demonstrated in your
life, as well as in the life of every human being when he applies them
faithfully. The art is your technique or process, and the science behind
it is the definite response of creative mind to your mental picture or
thought.
Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it
shall be opened unto you. MATTHEW 7:7.
Here you are told you shall receive that for which you ask. It shall
be opened to you when you knock, and you shall find that for which
you are searching. This teaching implies the definiteness of mental
and spiritual laws. There is always a direct response from the Infinite
Intelligence of your subconscious mind to your conscious thinking. If
you ask for bread, you will not receive a stone. You must ask
believing, if you are to receive. Your mind moves from the thought to
the thing. Unless there is first an image in the mind, it cannot move,
for there would be nothing for it to move toward.
Your prayer, which is your men-tal act must be accepted as an
image in your mind before the power from your subconscious will
74
play upon it and make it productive. You must reach a point of
acceptance in your mind, an unqualified and undisputed state of
agreement.
This contemplation should be accompanied by a feeling of joy and
restfulness in foreseeing the certain accomplishment of your desire.
The sound basis for the art and science of true prayer is your
knowledge and complete confidence that the movement of your
conscious mind will gain a definite response from your subconscious
mind, which is one with boundless wis-dom and infinite power. By
following this procedure, your pray-ers will be answered.
• The visualization technique
The easiest and most obvious way to formulate an idea is to
visualize it, to see it in your mind’s eye as vividly as if it were alive.
You can see with the naked eye only what already exists in the
external world; in a similar way, that which you can visualize in your
mind’s eye already exists in the invisible realms of your mind. Any
picture, which you have in your mind, is the substance of things hoped
for and the evidence of things not seen. What you form in your
imagination is as real as any part of your body. The idea and the
thought are real and will one day appear in your objective world if you
are faithful to your mental image.
This process of thinking forms impressions in your mind; these
impressions in turn become manifested as facts and ex-periences in
your life.
The builder visualizes the type of build-ing he wants; he sees it as
he desires it to be completed. His imagery and thought-processes
become a plastic mold from which the building will emerge—a
beautiful or an ugly one, a skyscraper or a very low one. His mental
imagery is projected as it is drawn on paper. Eventually, the contractor
and his work-ers gather the essential materials, and the building
progresses until it stands finished, conforming perfectly to the mental
pat-terns of the architect.
75
I use the visualization technique prior to speaking from the
platform. I quiet the wheels of my mind in order that I may present to
the subconscious mind my images of thought. Then, I picture the
entire auditorium and the seats filled with men and women, and each
one of them illumined and inspired by the in-finite healing presence
within each one. I see them as radiant, happy, and free.
Having first built up the idea in my imagination, I quietly sustain it
there as a mental picture while I imagine I hear men and women
saying, “I am healed,” “I feel wonderful,” “I’ve had an instantaneous
healing,” “I’m transformed.” I keep this up for about ten minutes or
more, knowing and feeling that each per-son’s mind and body are
saturated with love, wholeness, beauty, and perfection. My awareness
grows to the point where in my mind I can actually hear the voices of
the multitude proclaim-ing their health and happiness; then I release
the whole picture and go onto the platform. Almost every Sunday
some people stop and say that their prayers were answered.
• Mental movie method
The Chinese say, “A picture is worth a thousand words.” William
James, the father of American psychology, stressed the fact that the
subconscious mind will bring to pass any pic-ture held in the mind and
backed by faith. Act as though I am, and I will be.
A number of years ago I was in the Middle West lecturing in several
states, and I desired to have a permanent location in the general area
from which I could serve those who desired help. I traveled far, but
the desire did not leave my mind. One evening, while in a hotel in
Spokane, Washington, I relaxed completely on a couch, immobilized
my attention, and in a quiet, passive manner imagined that I was
talking to a large audience, saying in effect, “I am glad to be here; I
have prayed for the ideal opportunity.” I saw in my mind’s eye the
imaginary audience, and I felt the reality of it all. I played the role of
the actor, dramatized this mental movie, and felt satisfied that this
picture was being conveyed to my subconscious mind, which would
bring it to pass in its own way. The next morning, on awakening, I felt
76
a great sense of peace and satisfaction, and in a few days’ time I
received a telegram asking me to take over an organization in the
Midwest, which I did, and I enjoyed it immensely for several years.
The method outlined here appeals to many who have de-scribed it as
“the mental movie method.” I have received nu-merous letters from
people who listen to my radio talks and weekly public lectures, telling
me of the wonderful results they get using this technique in the sale of
their property. I suggest to those who have homes or property for sale
that they satisfy themselves in their own mind that their price is right.
Then, I claim that the Infinite Intelligence is attracting to them the
buyer who really wants to have the property and who will love it and
prosper in it. After having done this I suggest that they quiet their
mind, relax, let go, and get into a drowsy, sleepy state, which reduces
all mental effort to a minimum. Then, they are to picture the check in
their hands, rejoice in the check, give thanks for the check, and go off
to sleep feeling the naturalness of the whole mental movie created in
their own mind. They must act as though it were an objective reality,
and the subconscious mind will take it as an impression, and through
the deeper currents of the mind the buyer and the seller are brought
together. A mental picture held in the mind, backed by faith, will
come to pass.
• The Baudoin technique
Charles Baudoin was a professor at the Rousseau Institute in France.
He was a brilliant psychotherapist and a research director of the New
Nancy School of Healing, who in 1910 taught that the best way to
impress the subconscious mind was to enter into a drowsy, sleepy
state, or a state akin to sleep in which all effort was reduced to a
minimum. Then in a quiet, passive, receptive way, by reflection, he
would convey the idea to the subconscious.
The following is his formula: “A very sim-ple way of securing this
(impregnation of the subconscious mind) is to condense the idea
which is to be the object of sug-gestion, to sum it up in a brief phrase
77
which can be readily graven on the memory, and to repeat it over and
over again as a lullaby.”
Some years ago, a young lady in Los Angeles was engaged in a
prolonged bitter family lawsuit over a will. Her husband had
bequeathed his entire estate to her, and his sons and daugh-ters by a
previous marriage were bitterly fighting to break the will. The
Baudoin technique was outlined to her, and this is what she did: She
relaxed her body in an armchair, entered into the sleepy state and, as
suggested, condensed the idea of her need into a phrase consisting of
six words easily graven on the memory. “It is finished in Divine
Order.” The significance to her of these words meant that Infinite
Intelligence operating through the laws of her subconscious mind
would bring about a harmonious adjustment through the principle of
harmony. She continued this procedure every night for about ten
nights. After she got into a sleepy state, she would affirm slowly,
quietly, and feelingly the statement: “It is finished in Divine Order,”
over and over again, feeling a sense of inner peace and an all-pervading tranquility; then she went off into her deep, normal sleep.
On the morning of the eleventh day, following the use of the above
technique, she awakened with a sense of well-being, a conviction that
it was finished. Her attorney called her the same day, saying that the
opposing attorney and his clients were willing to settle. A harmonious
agreement was reached, and litigation was discontinued.
• The sleeping technique
By entering into a sleepy, drowsy state, effort is reduced to a
minimum. The conscious mind is submerged to a great extent when in
a sleepy state.
The reason for this is that the highest degree of outcropping of the
subconscious occurs prior to sleep and just after we awaken. In this
state the negative thoughts, which tend to neutralize your desire and so
prevent acceptance by your subconscious mind, are no longer present.
Suppose you want to get rid of a destructive habit. Assume a
comfortable posture, relax your body, and be still. Get into a sleepy
78
state, and in that sleepy state, say quietly, over and over again as a
lullaby, “I am completely free from this habit; harmony and peace of
mind reign supreme.” Repeat the above slowly, quietly, and lovingly
for five or ten minute’s night and morning. Each time you repeat the
words the emotional value becomes greater. When the urge comes to
repeat the negative habit, repeat the above formula out loud by
yourself. By this means you induce the subconscious to accept the
idea, and a healing follows.
• The thank-you technique
In the Bible, Paul recommends that we make known our requests
with praise and thanksgiving. Some extraordinary re-sults follow this
simple method of prayer. The thankful heart is always close to the
creative forces of the universe, causing count-less blessings to flow
toward it by the law of reciprocal relation-ship, based on a cosmic law
of action and reaction.
For instance, a father promises his son a car for gradua-tion; the boy
has not yet received the car, but he is very thank-ful and happy, and is
as joyous as though he had actually re-ceived the car. He knows his
father will fulfill his promise, and he is full of gratitude and joy even
though he has not yet received the car, objectively speaking. He has,
however, received it with joy and thankfulness in his mind.
I shall illustrate how Mr. Broke applied this technique with
excellent results. He said, “Bills are piling up, I am out of work, I have
three children and no money. What shall I do?” Regularly every night
and morning, for a period of about three weeks, he repeated the words,
“Thank you, Father, for my wealth,” in a relaxed, peaceful manner
until the feeling or mood of thankful-ness dominated his mind. He
imagined he was addressing the infinite power and intelligence within
him knowing, of course, that he could not see the creative intelligence
or infinite mind. He was seeing with the inner eye of spiritual
perception, realiz-ing that his thought-image of wealth was the first
cause, relative to the money, position, and food he needed. His
thought feeling was the substance of wealth untrammeled by
79
antecedent conditions of any kind. By repeating, “Thank you, Father,”
over and over again, his mind and heart were lifted up to the point of
acceptance, and when fear, thoughts of lack, poverty, and dis-tress
came into his mind, he would say, “Thank you, Father,” as often as
necessary. He knew that as he kept up the thankful attitude he would
recondition his mind to the idea of wealth, which is what happened.
The sequel to his prayer is very interesting. After praying in the
abovementioned manner, he met a former employer of his on the
street whom he had not seen for twenty years. The man offered him a
very lucrative position and advanced him $500 on a temporary loan.
Today, Mr. Broke is vicepresident of the company for which he
works. His recent remark to me was, “I shall never forget the wonders
of ‘Thank you, Father.’ It has worked wonders for me.”
• The affirmative method
The effectiveness of an affirmation is determined largely by your
understanding of the truth and the meaning back of the words, ³In
praying use not vain repetition.´ Therefore, the power of your
affirmation lies in the intelligent application of definite and specific
positives. For example, a boy adds three and three and puts down
seven on the blackboard. The teacher affirms with mathematical
certainty that three and three are six; there-fore, the boy changes his
figures accordingly. The teacher’s statement did not make three and
three equal six because the latter was already a mathematical truth.
The mathematical truth caused the boy to rearrange the figures on the
blackboard. It is abnormal to be sick; it is normal to be healthy. Health
is the truth of your being. When you affirm health, harmony, and
peace for yourself or another, and when you realize these are universal
principles of your own being, you will rearrange the negative patterns
of your subconscious mind based on your faith and understanding of
that which you affirm.
The result of the affirmative process of prayer depends on your
conforming to the principles of life, regardless of appear-ances.
80
Consider for a moment that there is a principle of mathematics and
none of error; there is a principle of truth but none of dishonesty.
There is a principle of intelligence but none of ignorance; there is a
principle of harmony and none of discord. There is a principle of
health but none of disease, and there is a principle of abundance but
none of poverty.
The affirmative method was chosen by the author for use on his
sister who was to be operated on for the removal of gall-stones in a
hospital in England. The condition described was based on the
diagnosis of hospital tests and the usual X-ray pro-cedures. She asked
me to pray for her. We were separated geographically about 6,500
miles, but there is no time or space in the mind principle. Infinite mind
or intelligence is present in its entirety at every point simultaneously. I
withdrew all thought from the contemplation of symptoms and from
the corporeal personality altogether. I affirmed as follows: “This
prayer is for my sister Catherine. She is relaxed and at peace, poised,
balanced, serene, and calm. The healing intelligence of her subconscious mind, which created her body, is now transforming every
cell, nerve, tissue, muscle, and bone of her being according to the
perfect pattern of all organs lodged in her subconscious mind. Silently,
quietly, all distorted thought patterns in her sub-conscious mind are
removed and dissolved, and the vitality, wholeness, and beauty of the
life principle are made manifest in every atom of her being. She is
now open and receptive to the healing currents, which are flowing
through her like a river, restoring her to perfect health, harmony, and
peace. All dis-tortions and ugly images are now washed away by the
infinite ocean of love and peace flowing through her, and it is so.”
I affirmed the above several times a day, and at the end of two
weeks my sister had an examination, which showed a re-markable
healing, and the X ray, proved negative.
To affirm is to state that it is so, and as you maintain this attitude of
mind as true, regardless of all evidence to the con-trary, you will
receive an answer to your prayer. Your thought can only affirm, for
81
even if you deny something, you are actually affirming the presence of
what you deny.
Repeating an affirma-tion, knowing what you are saying and why
you are saying it, leads the mind to that state of consciousness where it
accepts that which you state as true. Keep on affirming the truths of
life until you get the subconscious reaction, which satisfies.
• The argumentative method
This method is just what the word implies. It stems from the
procedure of Dr. Phineas Parkhurst Quimby of Maine. Dr. Quimby, a
pioneer in mental and spiritual healing, lived and practiced in Belfast,
Maine, about one hundred years ago. A book called The Quimby
Manuscripts, published in 1921 by Thomas Y. Crowell Company,
New York City, and edited by Horatio Dresser, is available in your
library. This book gives newspaper accounts of this man’s remarkable
results in prayer treatment of the sick.
Quimby duplicated many of the healing miracles recorded in the
Bible. In brief, the argumentative method employed according to
Quimby consists of spiritual reasoning where you convince the patient
and yourself that his sickness is due to his false belief, groundless
fears, and negative patterns lodged in his subconscious mind. You
reason it out clearly in your mind and convince your patient that the
disease or ailment is due only to a distorted, twisted pattern of
thought, which has taken form in his body. This wrong belief in some
external power and external causes has now externalized itself as
sickness, and can be changed by changing the thought patterns.
You explain to the sick person that the basis of all healing is a
change of belief. You also point out that the subconscious mind
created the body and all its organs; therefore, it knows how to heal it,
can heal it, and is doing so now as you speak. You argue in the
courtroom of your mind that the disease is a shadow of the mind based
on disease-soaked, morbid thought-imagery.
You continue to build up all the evidence you can muster on behalf
of the healing power within, which created all the organs in the first
82
place, and which has a perfect pattern of every cell, nerve, and tissue
within it. Then, you render a verdict in the courthouse of your mind in
favor of yourself or your patient. You liberate the sick one by faith
and spiritual understanding. Your mental and spiritual evidence is
overwhelming; they’re being but one mind, what you feel as true will
be resurrected in the experience of the patient. This procedure is
essentially the argumentative method used by Dr. Quimby of Maine
from 1849 to 1869.
• The absolute method is like modern sound wave therapy
Many people throughout the world practice this form of prayer
treatment with wonderful results. The person using the absolute
method mentions the name of the patient, such as John Jones, then
quietly and silently thinks of God and His qualities and attributes,
such as, God is all bliss, boundless love, infinite intelligence, allpowerful, boundless wisdom, absolute harmony, indescribable beauty,
and perfection. As he quietly thinks along these lines he is lifted up in
consciousness into a new spiritual wave length, at which times he
feels the infinite ocean of God’s love is now dissolving everything
unlike itself in the mind and body of John Jones for whom he is
praying. He feels all the power and love of God are now focused on
John Jones, and whatever is bothering or vexing him is now
completely neutralized in the presence of the infinite ocean of life and
love.
The absolute method of prayer might be likened to the sound wave
or sonic therapy recently shown me by a distin-guished physician in
Los Angeles. He has an ultra sound wave machine, which oscillates at
a tremendous speed and sends sound waves to any area of the body to
which it is directed. These sound waves can be controlled, and he told
me of achieving re-markable results in dissolving arthritic calcareous
deposits, as well as the healing and removal of other disturbing
conditions.
To the degree that we rise in consciousness by contemplat-ing
qualities and attributes of God, do we generate spiritual electronic
83
waves of harmony, health, and peace. Many remark-able healings
follow this technique of prayer.
•A cripple walks
Dr. Phineas Parkhurst Quimby, of whom we spoke previ-ously in
this
chapter, used the absolute method in the latter years of his healing
career. He was really the father of psychosomatic medicine and the
first psychoanalyst. He had the capacity to diagnose clairvoyantly the
cause of the patient’s trouble, pains, and aches.
The following is a condensed account of the healing of a cripple as
recorded in Quimby’s Manuscripts:
Quimby was called on to visit a woman who was lame, aged, and
bedridden. He states that her ailment was due to the fact that she was
imprisoned by a creed so small and contracted that she could not stand
upright and move about. She was living in the tomb of fear and
ignorance; furthermore, she was taking the Bible literally, and it
frightened her. “In this tomb,” Quimby said, “was the presence and
power of God trying to burst the bands, break through the bonds, and
rise from the dead.” When she would ask others for an explanation of
some passage of the Bible, the answer would be a stone; then she
would hunger for the bread of life. Dr. Quimby diagnosed her case as
a mind cloudy and stagnated, due to excitation and fear, caused by the
inability to see clearly the meaning of the passage of the Bible, which
she had been reading. This showed itself in the body by her heavy and
sluggish feeling, which would terminate as paralysis.
At this point Quimby asked her what was meant in the Bible verses:
Yet a little while am I with you, and then I go unto Him that sent me.
Ye shall seek me, and shall not find me: and where I am, thither ye
cannot come.
JOHN 7:33-34. She replied that it meant Jesus went to heaven.
Quimby explained what it really meant by telling her that being with
her a little while meant his explanation of her symptoms, feelings, and
84
their causes; i.e., he had compassion and sympathy for her
momentarily, but he could not remain in that mental state. The next
step was to go to Him that sent us, which, as Quimby pointed out, was
the creative power of God in all of us.
Quimby immediately traveled in his mind and contem-plated the
divine ideal; i.e., the vitality, intelligence, harmony, and power of God
functioning in the sick person. This is why he said to the woman,
“Therefore, where I go you cannot come, for you are in your narrow,
restricted belief, and I am in health.” This prayer and explanation
produced an instantaneous sensa-tion, and a change came over her
mind. She walked without her crutches! Quimby said it was one of the
most singular of all his healings. She was, as it were, dead to error,
and to bring her to life or truth was to raise her from the dead. Quimby
quoted the resurrection of Christ and applied it to her own Christ or
health; this produced a powerful effect on her. He also ex-plained to
her that the truth, which she accepted, was the angel or idea, which
rolled away the stone of fear, ignorance, and superstition, thereby,
releasing the healing power of God, which made her whole.
• The decree method
Power goes into our word according to the feeling and faith behind
it. When we realize the power that moves the world is moving on our
behalf and is backing up our word, our confidence and assurance
grow. You do not try and add power to power; therefore, there must
be no mental striving, coercion, force, or mental wrestling.
A young girl used the decree method on a young man who was
constantly phoning her, pressing her for dates, and meeting her at her
place of business; she found it very difficult to get rid of him. She
decreed as follows: “I release………unto God. He is in his true place
at all times. I am free, and he is free. I now decree that my words go
forth into infinite mind and it brings it to pass. It is so.” She said he
vanished and she has never seen him since, adding, “It was as though
the ground swallowed him up.”
85
Thou shalt decree a thing, and it shall be established unto thee: and
the light shall shine upon thy ways. JOB 22:28.
• Serve yourself with scientific truth
1. Be a mental engineer and use tried and proven techniques in
building a grander and greater life.
2. Your desire is your prayer. Picture the fulfillment of your desire
now and feel its reality, and you will experience the joy of the
answered prayer.
3. Desire to accomplish things the easy way—with the sure aid of
mental science.
4. You can build radiant health, success, and happiness by the
thoughts you think in the hidden studio of your mind.
5. Experiment scientifically until you personally prove that there is
always a direct response from the infinite intelli-gence of your
subconscious mind to your conscious think-ing.
6. Feel the joy and restfulness in foreseeing the certain
accomplishment of your desire. Any mental picture, which you have
in your mind, is the substance of things hoped for and the evidence of
things not seen.
7. A mental picture is worth a thousand words. Your subcon-scious
will bring to pass any picture held in the mind backed by faith.
8. Avoid all effort or mental coercion in prayer. Get into a sleepy,
drowsy state and lull yourself to sleep feeling and knowing that your
prayer is answered.
9. Remember that the thankful heart is always close to the riches of
the universe.
10. To affirm is to state that it is so, and as you maintain this attitude
of mind as true, regardless of all evidence to the contrary, you will
receive an answer to your prayer.
86
11. Generate electronic waves of harmony, health, and peace by
thinking of the love and the glory of God.
12. What you decree and feel as true will come to pass. Decree
harmony, health, peace, and abundance.
87
7
The Tendency of the Subconscious Is
Lifeward
Over 90 percent of your mental life is subconscious, so men and
women who fail to make use of this marvelous power live within very
narrow limits.
Your subconscious processes are always lifeward and con-structive.
Your subconscious is the builder of your body and maintains all its
vital functions. It is on the job 24 hours a day and never sleeps. It is
always trying to help and preserve you from harm.
Your subconscious mind is in touch with infinite life and boundless
wisdom, and its impulses and ideas are always life-ward. The great
aspirations, inspirations, and visions for a grander and nobler life,
spring from the subconscious. Your profoundest convictions are those
you cannot argue about rationally because they do not come from your
conscious mind; they come from your subconscious mind. Your
subconscious speaks to you in intuitions, impulses, hunches,
intimations, urges, and ideas, and it is always telling you to rise,
transcend, grow, advance, adventure, and move forward to greater
heights. The urge to love, to save the lives of others comes from the
depths of your subconscious. For example, during the great San
Francisco earthquake and fire of April 18, 1906, invalids and cripples
who had been confined to bed for long periods of time, rose up and
performed some of the most amazing feats of bravery and endurance.
The intense desire welled up within them to save others at all costs,
and their subconscious responded accordingly.
Great artists, musicians, poets, speakers, and writers tune in with
their subconscious powers and become animated and inspired. For
example, Robert Louis Stevenson, before he went to sleep, used to
charge his subconscious with the task of evolv-ing stories for him
while he slept. He was accustomed to ask his subconscious to give
88
him a good, marketable thriller when his bank account was low.
Stevenson said the intelligence of his deeper mind gave him the story
piece by piece, like a serial. This shows how your subconscious will
speak lofty and wise sayings through you, which your conscious mind
knows nothing about.
Mark Twain confided to the world on many occasions that he never
worked in his life. All his humor and all his great writ-ings were due
to the fact that he tapped the inexhaustible reser-voir of his
subconscious mind.
• How the body portrays the workings of the mind
The interaction of your conscious and subconscious mind requires a
similar interaction between the corresponding system of nerves. The
cerebrospinal system is the organ of the conscious mind, and the
sympathetic systemis the organ of the subcon-scious mind. The
cerebrospinal system is the channel through which you receive
conscious perception by means of your five physical senses and
exercise control over the movement of your body. This system has its
nerves in the brain, and it is the chan-nel of your volitional and
conscious mental action.
The sympathetic system, sometimes referred to as the in-voluntary
nervous system, has its center in a ganglionic mass at the back of the
stomach known as the solar plexus, and is some-times spoken of as
the abdominal brain. It is the channel of that mental action which
unconsciously supports the vital func-tions of the body.
The two systems may work separately or synchronously. Judge
Thomas Troward says, “The vaguest nerve passes out of the cerebral
region as a portion of the voluntary system, and through it we control
the vocal organs; then it passes onward to the thorax sending out
branches to the heart and lungs; finally, passing through the
diaphragm, it loses the outer coating which distinguishes the nerves of
the voluntary system and becomes identified with those of the
sympathetic system, so forming a connecting link between the two
and making the man physically a single entity.
89
“Similarly different areas of the brain indicate their con-nection
with the objective and subjective activities of the mind respectively,
and speaking in a general way we may assign the frontal portion of the
brain to the former and the posterior portion to the latter, while the
intermediate portion partakes of the character of both.”
A rather simple way of looking at the mental and physical
interaction is to realize that your conscious mind grasps an idea, which
induces a corresponding vibration in your voluntary sys-tem of nerves.
This in turn causes a similar current to be gen-erated in your
involuntary system of nerves, thus handling the idea over to your
subconscious mind, which is the creative me-dium. This is how your
thoughts become things.
Every thought entertained by your conscious mind and ac-cepted as
true is sent by your brain to your solar plexus, the brain of your
subconscious mind, to be made into your flesh, and to be brought forth
into your world as a reality.
• There is an intelligence which takes care of the body
When you study the cellular system and the structure of the organs,
such as eyes, ears, heart, liver, bladder, etc., you learn they consist of
groups of cells which form a group intelligence whereby they function
together and are able to take orders and carry them out in deductive
function at the suggestion of the master mind (conscious mind).
A careful study of the single-celled organism shows you what goes
on in your complex body. Though the mono-cellular organism has no
organs, it still gives evidence of mind action and reaction performing
the basic functions of movement, ali-mentation, assimilation, and
elimination.
Many say there is an intelligence, which will take care of your body
if you let it alone. That is true, but the difficulty is that the conscious
mind always interferes with its five-sense evi-dence based on outer
appearances, leading to the sway of false beliefs, fears, and mere
opinion. When fear, false beliefs, and negative patterns are made to
register in your subconscious mind through psychological, emotional
90
conditioning, there is no other course open to the subconscious mind
except to act on the blue-print specifications offered it.
• The subconscious mind works continually for the common good
The subjective self within you works continuously for the general
good, reflecting an innate principle of harmony behind all things.
Your subconscious mind has its own will, and it is a very real
something in itself.
It acts night and day whether you act upon it or not. It is the builder
of your body, but you cannot see, hear, or feel it building, as all this is
a silent process. Your subconscious has a life of its own which is
always moving toward harmony, health, and peace. This is the divine
norm within it seeking expression through you at all times.
• How man interferes with the innate principle of harmony
To think correctly, scientifically, we must know the “Truth.” To
know the truth is to be in harmony with the infinite intelli-gence and
power of your subconscious mind, which is always moving lifeward.
Every thought or action, which is not harmonious, whether through
ignorance or design, will result in discord and limitation of all kinds.
Scientists inform us that you build a new body every eleven months;
so you are really only eleven months old from a physical standpoint. If
you build defects back into your body by thoughts of fear, anger,
jealousy, and ill will, you have no one to blame but yourself.
You are the sum total of your own thoughts. You can keep from
entertaining negative thought and imagery. The way to get rid of
darkness is with light; the way to overcome cold is with heat; the way
to overcome the negative thought is to substitute the good thought.
Affirm the good, and the bad will vanish.
• Why it’s normal to be healthy, vital, and strong it’s abnormal to
be sick
The average child born into the world is perfectly healthy with all
its organs functioning perfectly. This is the normal state, and we
91
should remain healthy, vital, and strong. The instinct of selfpreservation is the strongest instinct of your nature, and it constitutes a
most potent, ever-present, and constantly opera-tive truth, inherent in
your nature. It is, therefore, obvious that all your thoughts, ideas, and
beliefs must operate with greater potentiality when they are in
harmony with the innate life-principle in you, which is forever seeking
to preserve and protect you along all lines. It follows from this that
normal conditions can be restored with greater ease and certainty than
abnormal conditions can be induced.
It is abnormal to be sick; it simply means you are going against the
stream of life and thinking negatively. The law of life is the law of
growth; all nature testifies to the operation of this law by silently,
constantly expressing itself in the law of growth. Where there is
growth and expression, there must be life; where there is life there
must be harmony, and where there is harmony, there is perfect health.
If your thought is in harmony with the creative principle of your
subconscious mind, you are in tune with the innate prin-ciple of
harmony. If you entertain thoughts which are not in accordance with
the principle of harmony, these thoughts cling to you, harass you,
worry you, and finally bring about disease, and if persisted in,
possibly death.
In the healing of disease, you must increase the inflow and
distribution of the vital forces of your subconscious mind throughout
your system. This can be done by eliminating thoughts of fear, worry,
anxiety, jealousy, hatred, and every other destructive thought which
tends to tear down and destroy your nerves and glands—body tissue
which controls the elimina-tion of all waste material.
• Pott’s disease cured
In the Nautilus magazine of March, 1917, there appears an article
about a boy suffering from Pott’s disease, or tuber-culosis of the
spine, who had a remarkable healing. His name was Frederick Elias
Andrews of Indianapolis, now minister of Unity School of
Christianity, Kansas City, Missouri. His physician pronounced him
92
incurable. He began to pray, and from a crooked, twisted cripple going
about on hands and knees, he be-came a strong, straight, well-formed
man. He created his own affirmation, mentally absorbing the qualities
he needed.
He affirmed over and over again many times a day, “I am whole,
perfect, strong, powerful, loving, harmonious, and happy.” He
persevered and said that this prayer was the last utterance on his lips at
night and the first in the morning. He prayed for others also by
sending out thoughts of love and health. This attitude of mind and way
of prayer returned to him multiplied many times. His faith and
perseverance paid off with big dividends. When thoughts of fear,
anger, jealousy, or envy drew his attention, he would immediately
start his counteracting force of affirmation going in his mind. His
subconscious mind responded according to the nature of his habitual
thinking. This is the meaning of the statement in the Bible, Go thy
way, thy faith hath made thee whole. MARK 10:52.
• How faith in your subconscious powers makes you whole
A young man, who came to my lectures on the healing power of the
subconscious mind, had severe eye trouble, which his doctor said
necessitated an operation. He said to himself, “My subconscious made
my eyes, and it can heal me.”
Each night, as he went to sleep, he entered into a drowsy, meditative
state, the condition akin to sleep. His attention was immobilized and
focused on the eye doctor. He imagined the doctor was in front of
him, and he plainly heard, or imagined he heard, the doctor saying to
him, “A miracle has happened!” He heard this over and over again
every night for perhaps five minutes or so before going to sleep. At
the end of three weeks he again went to the ophthalmologist who had
previously examined his eyes, and the physician said to this man,
“This is a miracle!”
What happened? This man impressed his subconscious mind using
the doctor as an instrument or a means of convincing it or conveying
the idea.
93
Through repetition, faith, and expect-ancy he impregnated his
subconscious mind. His subconscious mind made his eye; within it
was the perfect pattern, and imme-diately it proceeded to heal the eye.
This is another example of how faith in the healing power of your
subconscious can make you whole.
• Pointers to review
1. Your subconscious is the builder of your body and is on the job
24 hours a day. You interfere with its life-giving patterns by negative
thinking.
2. Charge your subconscious with the task of evolving an an-swer to
any problem, prior to sleep and it will answer you.
3. Watch your thoughts. Every thought accepted as true is sent by
your brain to your solar plexus—your abdominal brain—and is
brought into your world as a reality.
4. Know that you can remake yourself by giving a new blue-print to
your subconscious mind.
5. The tendency of your subconscious is always lifeward. Your job
is with your conscious mind. Feed your subconscious mind with
premises, which are true. Your subconscious is always reproducing
according to your habitual mental pat-terns.
6. You build a new body every eleven months. Change your body
by changing your thoughts and keeping them changed.
7. It is normal to be healthy. It is abnormal to be ill. There is within
the innate principle of harmony.
8. Thoughts of jealousy, fear, worry, and anxiety tear down and
destroy your nerves and glands bringing about mental and physical
diseases of all kinds.
9. What you affirm consciously and feel as true will be made
manifest in your mind, body and affairs. Affirm the good and enter
into the joy of living.
94
8
How to Get the Results You Want
The principle reasons for failure are: Lack of confidence and too
much effort. Many people block answers to their pray-ers by failing to
fully comprehend the workings of their subcon-scious mind. When
you know how your mind functions, you gain a measure of
confidence. You must remember whenever your subconscious mind
accepts an idea; it immediately begins to execute it. It uses all its
mighty resources to that end and mobilizes all the mental and spiritual
laws of your deeper mind. This law is true for good or bad ideas.
Consequently, if you use it negatively, it brings trouble, failure, and
confusion. When you use it constructively, it brings guidance,
freedom, and peace of mind.
The right answer is inevitable when your thoughts are posi-tive,
constructive, and loving. From this it is perfectly obvious that the only
thing you have to do in order to overcome failure is to get your
subconscious to accept your idea or request by feeling its reality now,
and the law of your mind will do the rest. Turn over your request with
faith and confidence, and your subconscious will take over and answer
for you.
You will always fail to get results by trying to use mental
coercion— your subconscious mind does not respond to coer-cion, it
responds to your faith or conscious mind acceptance.
Your failure to get results may also arise from such state-ments as:
“Things are getting worse.” “I will never get an an-swer.” “I see no
way out.” “It is hopeless.” “I don’t know what to do.” “I’m all mixed
up.” When you use such statements, you get no response or cooperation from your subconscious mind. Like a soldier marking time,
you neither go forward nor back-ward; in other words, you don’t get
anywhere.
95
If you get into a taxi and give half dozen different direc-tions to the
driver in five minutes, he would become hopelessly confused and
probably would refuse to take you anywhere. It is the same when
working with your subconscious mind. There must be a clear-cut idea
in your mind. You must arrive at the definite decision that there is a
way out, a solution to the vexing problem in sickness. Only the
infinite intelligence within your subconscious knows the answer.
When you come to that clear-cut conclusion in your conscious mind,
your mind is then made up, and according to your belief is it done
unto you.
• Easy does it
A house owner once remonstrated with a furnace repairman for
charging two hundred dollars for fixing the boiler. The me-chanic
said, “I charged five cents for the missing bolt and one hundred
ninety-nine dollars and ninety-five cents for knowing what was
wrong.”
Similarly, your subconscious mind is the master mechanic, the allwise one, who knows ways and means of healing any or-gan of your
body, as well as your affairs. Decree health, and your subconscious
will establish it, but relaxation is the key. “Easy does it.” Do not be
concerned with details and means, but know the end result. Get the
feel of the happy solution to your problem whether it is health,
finances, or employment. Remember how you felt after you had
recovered from a severe state of illness. Bear in mind that your feeling
is the touchstone of all subconscious demonstration. Your new idea
must be felt subjectively in a finished state, not the future, but as
coming about now.
• Infer no opponent, use imagination and not will power
In using your subconscious mind you infer no opponent, you use no
will power. You imagine the end and the freedom state. You will find
your intellect trying to get in the way, but persist in maintaining a
simple, childlike, miracle-making faith. Picture yourself without the
ailment or problem. Imagine the emotional accompaniment of the
96
freedom state you crave. Cut out all red tape from the process. The
simple way is the best.
• How disciplined imagination works wonders
A wonderful way to get a response from your subconscious mind is
through disciplined or scientific imagination. As previ-ously pointed
out, your subconscious mind is the builder of the body and controls all
its vital functions.
The Bible says, whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, believ-ing, ye
shall receive. To believe is to accept something as true, or to live in
the state of being it. As you sustain this mood, you shall experience
the joy of the answered prayer!
• The three steps to success in prayer
The usual procedure is as follows:
1. Take a look at the problem.
2. Turn to the solution or way out known only to the subconscious
mind.
3. Rest in a sense of deep conviction that it is done.
Do not weaken your prayer by saying, “I wish I might be healed.” “I
hope so.” Your feeling about the work to be done is “the boss.”
Harmony is yours. Know that health is yours. Be-come intelligent by
becoming a vehicle for the infinite healing power of the subconscious
mind. Pass on the idea of health Jo your subconscious mind to the
point of conviction; then relax. Get yourself off your hands. Say to the
condition and circum-stance, “This, too, shall pass.” Through
relaxation you impress your subconscious mind enabling the kinetic
energy behind the idea to take over and bring it into concrete
realization.
97
• The law of reversed effort and why you get the opposite of what
you pray for
Coué, the famous psychologist from France who visited America
about forty years ago, defined the law of reversed effort as follows:
“When your desires and imagination are in conflict your imagination
invariably gains the day.”
If, for example, you were asked to walk a plank on the floor, you
would do so without question. Now suppose the same plank were
placed twenty feet up in the air between two walls, would you walk it?
Your desire to walk it would be counter-acted by your imagination or
fear of falling. Your dominant idea, which would be the picture of
falling, would conquer. Your desire, will, or effort to walk on the
plank would be reversed, and the dominant idea of failure would be
reinforced.
Mental effort is invariably self-defeated, eventuating always in the
opposite of what is desired. The suggestions of powerless-ness to
overcome the condition dominate the mind; your sub-conscious is
always controlled by the dominant idea. Your subconscious will
accept the stronger of two contradictory propositions. The effortless
way is the better.
If you say, “I want a healing, but I can’t get it;” “I try so hard;” “I
force myself to pray;” “I use all the will power I have,” you must
realize that your error lies in your effort. Never try to compel the
subconscious mind to accept your idea by exercising will power. Such
attempts are doomed to failure, and you get the opposite of what you
prayed for.
The following is a rather common experience. Students, when
taking examinations and reading through their papers, find that all
their knowledge has suddenly deserted them. Their minds become
appalling blanks, and they are unable to recall one relevant thought.
The more they grit their teeth and sum-mon the powers of the will, the
further the answers seem to flee. But, when they have left the
98
examination room and the mental pressure relaxes, the answers they
were seeking flow tantalizingly back into their minds.
Trying to force themselves to remember was the cause of their
failure. This is an example of the law of reversed effort whereby you
get the opposite of what you asked or prayed for.
• The conflict of desire and imagination must be reconciled
To use mental force is to presuppose that there is opposi-tion. When
your mind is concentrated on the means to overcome a problem, it is
no longer concerned with the obstacle. MATT. 18:19 says, If two of
you shall agree on earth as touching anything that they shall ask, it
shall be done for them of my Father which is in heaven. Who are these
two?
It means the harmonious union or agreement between your
conscious and subconscious on any idea, desire, or mental image.
When there is no longer any quarrel in either part of your mind, your
prayer will be answered. The two agreeing may also be represented as
you and your de-sire, your thought and feeling, your idea and emotion,
your desire and imagination.
You avoid all conflict between your desires and imagina-tion by
entering into a drowsy, sleepy state which brings all effort to a
minimum.
The conscious mind is submerged to a great extent when in a sleepy
state.
The best time to impregnate your subconscious is prior to sleep. The
reason for this is that the highest degree of outcropping of the
subconscious occurs prior to sleep and just after we awaken. In this
state the nega-tive thoughts and imagery, which tend to neutralize
your desire and so prevent acceptance by your subconscious mind no
longer present themselves. When you imagine the reality of the fulfilled desire and feel the thrill of accomplishment, your subcon-scious
brings about the realization of your desire.
99
A great many people solve all their dilemmas and prob-lems by the
play of their controlled, directed, and disciplined imagination,
knowing that whatever they imagine and feel as true will and must
come to pass.
The following will clearly illustrate how a young girl over-came the
conflict between her desire and her imagination. She desired a
harmonious solution to her legal problem, yet her mental imagery was
constantly on failure, loss, bankruptcy, and poverty. It was a
complicated lawsuit and there was one post-ponement after another
with no solution in sight.
At my suggestion, she got into a sleepy, drowsy state each night
prior to sleep, and she began to imagine the happy ending, feeling it to
the best of her ability. She knew that the image in her mind had to
agree with her heart’s desire. Prior to sleep she began to dramatize as
vividly as possible her lawyer having an animated discussion with her
regarding the outcome. She would ask him questions, and he would
answer her appropriately. He would say to her over and over again,
“There has been a per-fect, harmonious solution. The case has been
settled out of court.” During the day when fear thoughts came into her
mind, she would run her mental movie with gestures, voice, and sound
equipment. She could easily imagine the sound of his voice, smile,
and mannerism. She ran this mental picture so often; it became a
subjective pattern, a regular train track. At the end of a few weeks her
attorney called her and confirmed objec-tively what she had been
imagining and feeling as true sub-jectively.
This is really what the Psalmist meant when he wrote, Let the words
of my mouth [your thoughts, mental images, good] and the meditations
of my heart [your feeling, nature, emotion] be acceptable in thy sight,
O Lord [the law of your subconscious mind], my strength, and my
redeemer [the power and wisdom of your subconscious mind can
redeem you from sickness, bond-age, and misery]. PSALM 19:14.
100
• Ideas worth recalling
1. Mental coercion or too much effort shows anxiety and fear, which
block your answer. Easy does it.
2. When your mind is relaxed and you accept an idea, your
subconscious goes to work to execute the idea.
3. Think and plan independently of traditional methods. Know that
there is always an answer and a solution to every prob-lem.
4. Do not be overly concerned with the beating of your heart, with
the breathing of your lungs, or the functions of any part of your
anatomy. Lean heavily upon your subconscious and proclaim
frequently that Divine right action is taking place.
5. The feeling of health produces health; the feeling of wealth
produces wealth. How do you feel?
6. Imagination is your most powerful faculty. Imagine what is
lovely and of good report. You are what you imagine yourself to be.
7. You avoid conflict between your conscious and subconscious in
the sleepy state. Imagine the fulfillment of your desire over and over
again prior to sleep. Sleep in peace and wake in joy.
101
9
How to Use the Power of Your
Subconscious for Wealth
If you are having financial difficulties, if you are trying to make
ends meet, it means you have not convinced your subcon-scious mind
that you will always have plenty and some to spare. You know men
and women who work a few hours a week and make fabulous sums of
money. They do not strive or slave hard. Do not believe the story that
the only way you can become wealthy is by the sweat of your brow
and hard labor. It is not so; the effortless way of life is the best. Do the
thing you love to do, and do it for the joy and thrill of it.
I know an executive in Los Angeles who receives a salary of
$75,000 yearly. Last year he went on a nine-month cruise seeing the
world and its beauty spots. He said to me that he had succeeded in
convincing his subconscious mind that he is worth that much money.
He told me that many men in his organiza-tion getting about one
hundred dollars a week knew more about the business than he did, and
could manage it better, but they had no ambition, no creative ideas,
and were not interested in the wonders of their subconscious mind.
• Wealth is of the mind
Wealth is simply a subconscious conviction on the part of the
individual.
You will not become a millionaire by saying, “I am a millionaire, I
am a millionaire.” You will grow into a wealth consciousness by
building into your mentality the idea of wealth and abundance.
• Your invisible means of support
The trouble with most people is that they have no invisible means of
support. When business falls away, the stock market drops, or they
lose their investments, they seem helpless. The reason for such
102
insecurity is that they do not know how to tap the subconscious mind.
They are unacquainted with the in-exhaustible storehouse within.
A man with a poverty type mind finds himself in poverty-stricken
conditions. Another man with a mind filled with ideas of wealth is
surrounded with everything he needs. It was never intended that man
should lead a life of indigence. You can have wealth, everything you
need, and plenty to spare. Your words have power to cleanse your
mind of wrong ideas and to instill right ideas in their place.
• The ideal method for building a wealth consciousness
Perhaps you are saying as you read this chapter, “I need wealth and
success.” This is what you do: Repeat for about five minutes to
yourself three or four times a day, “Wealth—Suc-cess.” These words
have tremendous power. They represent the inner power of the
subconscious mind. Anchor your mind on this substantial power
within you; then conditions and circum-stances corresponding to their
nature and quality will be mani-fested in your life. You are not saying,
“I am wealthy,” you are dwelling on real powers within you. There is
no conflict in the mind when you say, “Wealth.” Furthermore, the
feeling of wealth will well up within you as you dwell on the idea of
wealth.
The feeling of wealth produces wealth; keep this in mind at all
times. Your subconscious mind is like a bank, a sort of universal
financial institution. It magnifies whatever you deposit or impress
upon it whether it is the idea of wealth or of poverty. Choose wealth.
• Why your affirmations for wealth fail
I have talked to many people during the past thirty-five years whose
usual complaint is, “I have said for weeks and months, ‘I am wealthy,
I am prosperous,’ and nothing has hap-pened.” I discovered that when
they said, “I am prosperous, I am wealthy,” they felt within that they
were lying to themselves.
One man told me, “I have affirmed that I am prosperous until I am
tired. Things are now worse. I knew when I made the statement that it
103
was obviously not true.” His statements were rejected by the
conscious mind, and the very opposite of what he outwardly affirmed
and claimed was made manifest.
Your affirmation succeeds best when it is specific and when it does
not produce a mental conflict or argument; hence the statements made
by this man made matters worse because they suggested his lack.
Your subconscious accepts what you really feel to be true, not just idle
words or statements. The dominant idea or belief is always accepted
by the subconscious mind.
• How to avoid mental conflict
The following is the ideal way to overcome this conflict for those
who have this difficulty. Make this practical statement frequently,
particularly prior to sleep: “By day and by night I am being prospered
in all of my interests.” This affirmation will not arouse any argument
because it does not contradict your subconscious mind’s impression of
financial lack.
I suggested to one businessman whose sales and finances were very
low and who was greatly worried, that he sit down in his office,
become quiet, and repeat this statement over and over again: “My
sales are improving every day.” This statement en-gaged the cooperation of the conscious and subconscious mind; results followed.
• Don’t sign blank checks
You sign blank checks when you make such statements as, “There
is not enough to go around.” “There is a shortage.” “I will lose the
house because of the mortgage,” etc. If you are full of fear about the
future, you are also writing a blank check and attracting negative
conditions to you. Your subconscious mind takes your fear and
negative statement as your request and proceeds in its own way to
bring obstacles, delays, lack, and limitation into your life.
• Your subconscious gives you compound interest
To him that hath the feeling of wealth, more wealth shall be added;
to him that hath the feeling of lack, more lack shall be added. Your
104
subconscious multiplies and magnifies whatever you deposit in it.
Every morning as you awaken deposit thoughts of prosperity, success,
wealth, and peace. Dwell upon these con-cepts. Busy your mind with
them as often as possible. These constructive thoughts will find their
way as deposits in your subconscious mind, and bring forth abundance
and prosperity.
• Why nothing happened
I can hear you saying, “Oh, I did that and nothing hap-pened.” You
did not get results because you indulged in fear thoughts perhaps ten
minutes later and neutralized the good you had affirmed. When you
place a seed in the ground, you do not dig it up. You let it take root
and grow.
Suppose, for example, you are going to say, “I shall not be able to
make that payment.” Before you get further than, “I shall—” stop the
sentence and dwell on a constructive state-ment, such as, “By day and
by night I am prospered in all my ways.”
• True source of wealth
Your subconscious mind is never short of ideas. There are within it
an infinite number of ideas ready to flow into your conscious mind
and appear as cash in your pocketbook in countless ways. This process
will continue to go on in your mind regardless of whether the stock
market goes up or down, or whether the pound sterling or dollar drops
in value. Your wealth is never truly dependent on bonds, stocks, or
money in the bank; these are really only symbols necessary and
useful, of course, but only symbols.
The point I wish to emphasize is that if you convince your
subconscious mind that wealth is yours, and that it is always
circulating in your life, you will always and inevitably have it,
regardless of the form it takes.
• Trying to make ends meet and the real cause
There are people who claim that they are always trying to make
ends meet. They seem to have a great struggle to meet their
105
obligations. Have you listened to their conversation? In many
instances their conversation runs along this vein. They are constantly
condemning those who have succeeded in life and who have raised
their heads above the crowd. Perhaps they are saying, “Oh, that fellow
has a racket; he is ruthless; he is a crook.” This is why they lack; they
are condemning the thing they desire and want. The reason they speak
critically of their more prosperous associates is because they are
envious and covetous of the others prosperity. The quickest way to
cause wealth to take wings and fly away is to criticize and condemn
others who have more wealth than you.
• A common stumbling block to wealth
There is one emotion, which is the cause of the lack of wealth in the
lives of many. Most people learn this the hard way. It is envy. For
example, if you see a competitor depositing large sums of money in
the bank, and you have only a meager amount to deposit, does it make
you envious? The way to overcome this emotion is to say to yourself,
“Isn’t it wonderful! I rejoice in that man’s prosperity. I wish for him
greater and greater wealth.”
To entertain envious thoughts is devastating because it places you in
a very negative position; therefore, wealth flows from you instead of
to you. If you are ever annoyed or irritated by the prosperity or great
wealth of another, claim immediately that you truly wish for him
greater wealth in every possible way. This will neutralize the negative
thoughts in your mind and cause an ever-greater measure of wealth to
flow to you by the law of your own subconscious mind.
• Rubbing out a great mental block to wealth
If you are worried and critical about someone whom you claim is
making money dishonestly, cease worrying about him. You know
such a person is using the law of mind negatively; the law of mind
takes care of him. Be careful not to criticize him for the reasons
previously indicated.
106
Remember: The block or obstacle to wealth is in your own mind.
You can now destroy that mental block. This you may do by getting
on mental good terms with everyone.
• Sleep and grow rich
As you go to sleep at night, practice the following tech-nique.
Repeat the word, “Wealth,” quietly, easily, and feelingly. Do this over
and over again, just like a lullaby. Lull yourself to sleep with the one
word, “Wealth.” You should be amazed at the result. Wealth should
flow to you in avalanches of abundance. This is another example of
the magic power of your subcon-scious mind.
• Serve yourself with the powers of your mind
1. Decide to be wealthy the easy way, with the infallible aid of your
subconscious mind.
2. Trying to accumulate wealth by the sweat of your brow and hard
labor is one way to become the richest man in the graveyard. You do
not have to strive or slave hard.
3. Wealth is a subconscious conviction. Build into your men-tality
the idea of wealth.
4. The trouble with most people is that they have no invisible means
of support.
5. Repeat the word, “Wealth,” to yourself slowly and quietly for
about five minutes prior to sleep and your subconscious will bring
wealth to pass in your experience.
6. The feeling of wealth produces wealth. Keep this in mind at all
times.
7. Your conscious and subconscious mind must agree. Your
subconscious accepts what you really feel to be true. The dominant
idea is always accepted by your subconscious mind. The dominant
idea should be wealth, not poverty.
107
8. You can overcome any mental conflict regarding wealth by
affirming frequently, “By day and by night I am being pros-pered in
all of my interests.”
9. Increase your sales by repeating this statement over and over
again, “My sales are improving every day; I am ad-vancing,
progressing, and getting wealthier every day.”
10. Stop writing blank checks, such as, “There is not enough to go
around,” or “There is a shortage,” etc. Such state-ments magnify and
multiply your loss.
11. Deposit thoughts of prosperity, wealth, and success in your
subconscious mind, and the latter will give you compound interest.
12. What you consciously affirm, you must not mentally deny a few
moments later. This will neutralize the good you have affirmed.
13. Your true source of wealth consists of the ideas in your mind.
You can have an idea worth millions of dollars. Your subconscious
will give you the idea you seek.
14. Envy and jealousy are stumbling blocks to the flow of wealth.
Rejoice in the prosperity of others.
15. The block to wealth is in your own mind. Destroy that block
now by getting on good mental terms with everyone.
108
10
Your Right to Be Rich
It is your right to be rich. You are here to lead the abun-dant life and
be happy, radiant, and free. You should, therefore, have all the money
you need to lead a full, happy, and pros-perous life.
You are here to grow, expand, and unfold spiritually, men-tally, and
materially. You have the inalienable right to fully develop and express
yourself along all lines. You should sur-round yourself with beauty
and luxury.
Why be satisfied with just enough to go around when you can enjoy
the riches of your subconscious mind? In this chapter you can learn to
make friends with money, and you should al-ways have a surplus.
Your desire to be rich is a desire for a fuller, happier, more wonderful
life. It is a cosmic urge. It is not only good, but also very good.
• Money is a symbol
Money is a symbol of exchange. It means to you not only freedom
from want, but beauty, luxury, abundance, and refine-ment. It is
merely a symbol of the economic health of the nation. When your
blood is circulating freely in your body, you are healthy. When money
is circulating freely in your life, you are economically healthy. When
people begin to hoard money, to put it away in tin boxes, and become
charged with fear, there is economic illness.
Money has taken many forms as a medium of exchange down
through the centuries, such as, salt, beads, and trinkets of various
kinds. In early times a man’s wealth was determined by the number of
sheep and oxen he had. Now we use currency, and other negotiable
instruments, as it is much more convenient to write a check than carry
some sheep around with you to pay bills.
109
• How to walk the royal road to riches
Knowledge of the powers of your subconscious mind is the means
to the royal road to riches of all kinds—spiritual, men-tal, or
financial. The student of the laws of mind believes and knows
definitely that regardless of economic situations, stock market
fluctuation, depression, strikes, war, other conditions or
circumstances, he will always be amply supplied, regardless of what
form money takes. The reason for this is that he has con-veyed the
idea of wealth to his subconscious mind, and it keeps him supplied
wherever he may be. He has convinced himself in his mind that
money is forever flowing freely in his life and that there is always a
wonderful surplus. Should there be a fi-nancial collapse of
government tomorrow and all the man’s present holdings become
valueless, as the German marks did after the First World War, he
would still attract wealth and be cared for, regardless of the form the
new currency took.
• Why you do not have more money
As you read this chapter, you are probably saying, “I am worthy of a
higher salary than I am receiving.” I believe most people are
inadequately compensated. One of the causes many people does not
have more money is that they are silently or openly condemning it.
They refer to money as “filthy lucre” or “the love of money is the root
of all evil.” Another reason they do not prosper is that they have a
sneaky subconscious feeling there is some virtue in poverty. This
subconscious pattern may be due to early childhood training,
superstition, or it could be based on a false interpretation of scriptures.
• Money and a balanced life
One time a man said to me, “I am broke. I do not like money. It is
the
root of all evil.” These statements represent a confused neurotic
mind. Love of money to the exclusion of everything else will cause
you to become lopsided and unbal-anced. You are here to use your
110
power or authority wisely. Some men crave power others crave
money.
If you set your heart on money exclusively and say, “Money is all I
want; I am going to give all my attention to amassing money; nothing
else matters,” you can get money and attain a fortune, but you have
forgotten that you are here to lead a balanced life. You must also
satisfy the hunger for peace of mind, harmony, love, joy, and perfect
health.
By making money your sole aim, you simply made a wrong choice.
You thought that was all you wanted, but you found after all your
efforts that it was not only the money you needed. You also desired
true expression of your hidden talents, true place in life, beauty, and
the joy of contributing to the welfare and success of others. By
learning the laws of your subconscious mind, you could have a million
dollars or many millions, if you wanted them, and still have peace of
mind, harmony, per-fect health, and perfect expression.
• Poverty is a mental disease
There is no virtue in poverty; it is a disease like any other mental
disease. If you were physically ill, you would think there was
something wrong with you. You would seek help and do something
about the condition at once. Likewise, if you do not have money
constantly circulating in your life, there is some-thing radically wrong
with you.
The urge of the life principle in you is toward growth, ex-pansion,
and the life more abundant. You are not here to live in a hovel, dress
in rags, and go hungry. You should be happy, prosperous, and
successful.
• Why you must never criticize money
Cleanse your mind of all weird and supe rstitious beliefs about
money. Do not ever regard money as evil or filthy. If you do, you
cause it to take wings and fly away from you. Remember that you lose
what you condemn. You cannot attract what you criticize.
111
• Getting the right attitude toward money
Here is a simple technique you may use to multiply money in your
experience. Use the following statements several times a day, “I like
money, I love it, I use it wisely, constructively, and judiciously.
Money is constantly circulating in my life. I release it with joy, and it
returns to me multiplied in a wonderful way. It is good and very good.
Money flows to me in avalanches of abundance. I use it for good only,
and I am grateful for my good and for the riches of my mind.”
• How the scientific thinker looks at money
Suppose, for example, you found gold, silver, lead, copper, or iron
in the ground. Would you pronounce these things evil? All evil comes
from man’s darkened understanding, from his ignorance, from his
false interpretation of life, and from his misuse of his subconscious
mind. Uranium, lead, or some other metal could have been used as a
medium of exchange. We use paper bills, checks, nickel, and silver
surely these are not evil. Physicists and chemists know today that the
only difference between one metal and another is the number and rate
of motion of electrons revolving around a central nucleus. They can
now change one metal into another through a bombardment of the
atoms in the powerful cyclotron. Gold under certain conditions
becomes mercury. I believe that our modern scientists in the near
future will be able to make gold, silver, and other metals synthetically
in the chemical laboratory. The cost may be pro-hibitive now, but it
can be done. I cannot imagine any intelli-gent person seeing anything
evil in electrons, neutrons, protons, and isotopes.
The piece of paper in your pocket is composed of atoms and
molecules with their electrons and protons arranged differ-ently. Their
number and rate of motion are different. That is the only way the
paper differs from the silver in your pocket.
• How to attract the money you need
Many years ago I met a young boy in Australia who wanted to
become a physician and surgeon, but he had no money. I explained to
him how a seed deposited in the soil attracts to itself everything
112
necessary for its unfolding, and that all he had to do was to take a
lesson from the seed and deposit the required idea in his subconscious
mind. For expenses this young, brilliant boy used to clean out doctors’
offices, wash windows, and do odd repair jobs. He told me that every
night, as he went to sleep, he used to picture in his mind’s eye a
medical diploma on a wall with his name on it in big, bold letters. He
used to clean and shine the framed diplomas in the medical building
where he worked. It was not hard for him to engrave the image of a
diploma in his mind and develop it there. Definite results fol-lowed as
he persisted with his mental picture every night for about four months.
The sequel of this story was very interesting. One of the doctors
took a great liking to this young boy and after training him in the art
of sterilizing instruments, giving hypodermic in-jections, and other
miscellaneous first-aid work, he employed him as a technical assistant
in his office. The doctor later sent him to medical school at his own
expense. Today, this young man is a prominent medical doctor in
Montreal, Canada. He discovered the law of attraction by using his
subconscious mind the right way. He operated an ageold law, which
says, “Having seen the end, you have willed the means to the
realization of the end.” The end in this case was to become a medical
doctor.
This young man was able to imagine, see, and feel the reality of
being a doctor. He lived with that idea, sustained it, nourished it, and
loved it until through his imagination it pene-trated the layers of his
subconscious mind and became a con-viction, thereby attracting to
him everything necessary for the fulfillment of his dream.
• Why some men do not get a raise in pay
If you are working in a large organization and you are silently
thinking of and resenting the fact you are underpaid, that you are not
appreciated, and that you deserve more money and greater
recognition, you are subconsciously severing your ties with that
organization. You are setting a law in motion, and the superintendent
or manager will say to you, “We have to let you go.” Actually, you
113
dismissed yourself. The manager was simply the instrument through
which your own negative mental state was confirmed. It was an
example of the law of action and reaction. The action was your
thought, and the reaction was the response of your subconscious mind.
• Obstacles and impediments on the pathway to riches
I am sure you have heard men say, “That fellow has a racket.” “He
is a racketeer.” “He is getting money dishonestly.” “He is a faker.” “I
knew him when he had nothing.” “He is a crook, a thief, and a
swindler.”
If you analyze the man who talks like that, you discover he is
usually in want or suffering from some financial or physical illness.
Perhaps his former college friends went up the ladder of success and
excelled him. Now he is bitter and envious of their progress. In many
instances this is the cause of his downfall. Thinking negatively of
these classmates and condemning their wealth causes the wealth and
prosperity he is praying for to vanish and flee away. He is
condemning the thing he is praying for.
He is praying two ways. On the one hand he is saying, “Wealth is
flowing to me now,” and in the next breath, silently or audibly, he is
saying, “I resent that fellow’s wealth.” Always make it a special point
to rejoice in the wealth of the other person.
• Protect your investments
If you are seeking wisdom regarding investments, or if you are
worried about your stocks or bonds, quietly claim, “Infinite
intelligence governs and watches over all my financial transac-tions,
and whatsoever I do shall prosper.” Do this frequently and you will
find that your investments will be wise; moreover, you will be
protected from loss, as you will be prompted to sell your securities or
holdings before any loss accrues to you.
• You cannot get something for nothing
In large stores the management employs store detectives to prevent
people from stealing. They catch a number of people every day trying
114
to get something for nothing. All such people are living in the mental
atmosphere of lack and limitation and are stealing from themselves
peace, harmony, faith, honesty, integrity, good will, and confidence.
Furthermore, they are attracting to themselves all manner of loss, such
as, loss of charac-ter, prestige, social status, and peace of mind. These
people lack faith in the source of supply and the understanding of how
their minds work. If they would mentally call on the powers of their
subconscious mind and claim that they are guided to their true
expression, they would find work and constant supply. Then by
honesty, integrity, and perseverance, they would become a credit to
themselves and to society at large.
• Your constant supply of money
Recognizing the powers of your subconscious mind and the creative
power of your thought or mental image is the way to opulence,
freedom, and constant supply. Accept the abundant life in your own
mind. Your mental acceptance and expectancy of wealth has its own
mathematics and mechanics of expression. As you enter into the mood
of opulence, all things necessary for the abundant life will come to
pass.
Let this be your daily affirmation; write it in your heart, “I am one
with the infinite riches of my subconscious mind. It is my right to be
rich, happy, and successful. Money flows to me freely, copiously, and
endlessly. I am forever conscious of my true worth. I give of my
talents freely, and I am wonderfully blessed financially. It is
wonderful!”
• Step up this way to riches
1. Be bold enough to claim that it is your right to be rich and your
deeper mind will honor your claim.
2. You don’t want just enough to go around. You want all the
money you need to do all the things you want to do and when you
want to do them. Get acquainted with the riches of your subconscious
mind.
115
3. When money is circulating freely in your life, you are economically healthy. Look at money like the tide and you will always
have plenty of it. The ebb and flow of the tide is constant. When the
tide is out, you are absolutely sure that it will return.
4. Knowing the laws of your subconscious mind, you will al-ways
be supplied regardless of what form money takes.
5. One reason many people simply make ends meet and never have
enough money is that they condemn money. What you condemn takes
wings and flies away.
6. Do not make a god of money. It is only a symbol. Remem-ber
that the real riches are in your mind. You are here to lead a balanced
life—this includes acquiring all the money you need.
7. Don’t make money your sole aim. Claim wealth, happiness,
peace, true expression, and love, and personally radiate love and good
will to all. Then your subconscious mind will give you compound
interest in all these fields of expression.
8. There is no virtue in poverty. It is a disease of the mind, and you
should heal yourself of this mental conflict or malady at once.
9. You are not here to live in a hovel, to dress in rags, or to go
hungry. You are here to lead the life more abundant.
10. Never use the terms “filthy lucre” or “I despise money.” You
lose what you criticize. There is nothing good or bad, but thinking of
it in either light makes it so.
11. Repeat frequently, “I like money. I use it wisely, construc-tively,
and judiciously. I release it with joy, and it returns a thousand fold.”
12. Money is not evil any more so than copper, lead, tin, or iron
which you may find in the ground. All evil is due to igno-rance and
misuse of the mind’s powers.
13. To picture the end result in your mind causes your subconscious to respond and fulfill your mental picture.
116
14. Stop trying to get something for nothing. There is no such thing
as a free lunch. You must give to receive. You must give mental
attention to your goals, ideals, and enterprises, and your deeper mind
will back you up. The key to wealth is application of the laws of the
subconscious mind by im-pregnating it with the idea of wealth.
117
11
Your Subconscious Mind as a Partner
in Success
Success means successful living. A long period of peace, joy, and
happiness on this plane may be termed success. The eternal
experience of these qualities is the everlasting life spoken of by Jesus.
The real things of life, such as peace, harmony, integrity, security, and
happiness are intangible. They come from the Deep Self of man.
Meditating on these qualities builds these treasures of heaven in our
subconscious. It is where moth and rust do not consume, and where
thieves do not break through and steal. MATT. 6:20.
• The three steps to success
Let us discuss three steps to success: The first step to suc-cess is to
find out the thing you love to do, then do it. Success is in loving your
work.
Although, if a man is a psychiatrist, it is not adequate for him to get
a diploma and place it on the wall; he must keep up with the times,
attend conventions, and continue studying the mind and its workings.
The successful psychiatrist visits clinics and reads the latest scientific
articles. In other words, he is informed in the most advanced methods
of alleviating human suffering. The successful psychiatrist or doctor
must have the interest of his patients at heart.
Someone may say, “How can I put the first step into opera-tion? I
do not know what I should do.” In such a case, pray for guidance as
follows: “The infinite intelligence of my subcon-scious mind reveals
to me my true place in life.” Repeat this prayer quietly, positively, and
lovingly to your deeper mind. As you persist with faith and
confidence, the answer will come to you as a feeling, a hunch, or a
tendency in a certain direction. It will come to you clearly and in
peace, and as an inner silent awareness.
118
The second step to success is to specialize in some particular branch
of work and know more about it than anyone else. For example, if a
young man chooses chemistry as his profession, he should concentrate
on one of the many branches in this field. He should give all of his
time and attention to his chosen spe-cialty. He should become
sufficiently enthusiastic to try to know all there is available about his
field; if possible, he should know more than anyone else. The young
man should become ardently interested in his work and should desire
to serve the world.
He that is greatest among you, let him become your serv-ant. There
is a great contrast in this attitude of mind in com-parison to that of the
man who only wants to makes a living or just “get by.” “Getting by”
is not true success. Man’s motive must be greater, nobler, and more
altruistic. He must serve others, thereby casting his bread upon the
waters.
The third step is the most important one. You must be sure that the
thing you want to do does not redound to your success only. Your
desire must not be selfish; it must benefit humanity. The path of a
complete circuit must be formed. In other words, your idea must go
forth with the purpose of blessing or serving the world. It will then
come back to you pressed down, shaken together, and running over. If
it is to benefit yourself exclusively, the circle or complete circuit is not
formed, and you may ex-perience a short circuit in your life which
may consist of limita-tion or sickness.
•The measure of true success
Some people may say, “But Mr. James made a fortune in selling
fraudulent oil stock.” A man may seem to succeed for a while, but the
money he obtained by fraud usually takes wings and flies away. When
we rob from another, we rob from our-selves, because we are in a
mood of lack and limitation, which may manifest itself in our body,
home life, and affairs.
What we think and feel, we create. We create what we believe. Even
though a man may have accumulated a fortune fraudulently, he is not
119
successful. There is no success without peace of mind. What good is
man’s accumulated wealth if he cannot sleep nights, is sick, or has a
guilt complex?
I knew a man in London who told me of his exploits. He had been a
professional pickpocket and had amassed a large amount of money.
He had a summer home in France and lived in a royal fashion in
England. His story was that he was in con-stant dread of being
arrested by Scotland Yard. He had many inner disorders, which were
undoubtedly caused by his constant fear and deep-seated guilt
complex. He knew he had done wrong. This deep sense of guilt
attracted all kinds of trouble to him. Subsequently, he voluntarily
surrendered to the police and served a prison sentence. After his
release from prison, he sought psychological and spiritual counsel and
became transformed. He went to work and became an honest, lawabiding citizen. He found what he loved to do and was happy.
A successful person loves his work and expresses himself fully.
Success is contingent upon a higher ideal than the mere accumulation
of riches. The man of success is the man who possesses great
psychological and spiritual understanding. Many of the great
industrialists today depend upon the correct use of their subconscious
minds for their success.
There was an article published some years ago about Flagler, an oil
magnate. He admitted that the secret of his success was his ability to
see a project in its completion. For instance, in his case, he closed his
eyes, imagined a big oil industry, saw trains running on tracks, heard
whistles blowing, and saw smoke. Having seen and felt the fulfillment
of his prayer, his subconscious mind brought about its realization. If
you imagine an objective clearly, you will be provided with the
necessities, in ways you know not of, through the wonder-working
power of your subconscious mind.
In considering the three steps to success you must never forget the
underlying power of the creative forces of your sub-conscious mind.
This is the energy in back of all steps in any plan of success. Your
120
thought is creative. Thought fused with feeling becomes a subjective
faith or belief, and according to your belief is it done unto you.
MATT. 9:29.
Knowledge of a mighty force in you, which is capable of bringing to
pass all your desires, gives you confidence and a sense of peace.
Whatever your field of action may be, you should learn the laws of
your subconscious mind. When you know how to apply the powers of
your mind, and when you are expressing yourself fully and giving of
your talents to others, you are on the sure path to true success. If you
are about God’s business, or any part of it, God, by His very nature, is
for you, so who can be against you? With this understanding there is
no power in heaven or on earth to withhold success from you.
• How he made his dream come true
A movie actor told me that he had very little education, but he had a
dream as a boy of becoming a successful movie actor. Out in the field
mowing hay, driving the cows home, or even when milking them he
said, “I would constantly imagine I saw my name in big lights at a
large theatre. I kept this up for years until finally I ran away from
home. I got extra jobs in the motion-picture field, and the day finally
came when I saw my name in great, big lights as I did when I was a
boy!” Then he added, “I know the power of sustained imagination to
bring success.”
• His dream pharmacy became a reality
Thirty years ago I knew a young pharmacist who was re-ceiving
forty dollars a week plus commission on sales. “After twenty-five
years,” he said to me, “I will get a pension and re-tire.”
I said to this young man, “Why don’t you own your own store? Get
out of this place. Raise your sights! Have a dream for your children.
Maybe your son wants to be a doctor; perhaps your daughter desires to
be a great musician.”
His answer was that he had no money! He began to awaken to the
fact that whatever he could conceive as true, he could give conception.
121
The first step toward his goal was his awakening to the powers of
his subconscious mind, which I briefly elaborated on for his benefit.
His second step was his realization that if he could succeed in
conveying an idea to his subconscious mind, the latter would
somehow bring it to pass.
He began to imagine that he was in his own store. He mentally
arranged the bottles, dispensed prescriptions, and imagined several
clerks in the store waiting on customers. He also visualized a big bank
balance. Mentally he worked in that imaginary store. Like a good
actor he lived the role. Act as though I am, and I will be. This
pharmacist put himself whole-heartedly into the act, living, moving,
and acting on the assump-tion that he owned the store.
The sequel was interesting. He was discharged from his position. He
found new employment with a large chain store, became manager, and
later on, district manager. He saved enough money in four years to
provide a down payment on a drugstore of his own. He called it his
“Dream Pharmacy.”
“It was,” he said, “exactly the store I saw in my imagina-tion.” He
became a recognized success in his chosen field, and was happy doing
what he loved to do.
• Using the subconscious mind in business
Some years ago I gave a lecture to a group of businessmen on the
powers of imagination and the subconscious mind. In this lecture I
pointed out how Goethe used his imagination wisely when confronted
with difficulties and predicaments.
His biographers point out that he was accustomed to fill many hours
quietly holding imaginary conversations. It is well known that his
custom was to imagine one of his friends before him in a chair
answering him in the right way. In other words, if he were concerned
over any problems, he imagined his friend giving him the right or
appropriate answer, accompanied with the usual gestures and tonal
qualities of the voice, and he made the entire imaginary scene as real
and as vivid as possible.
122
One of the men present at this lecture was a young stock-broker. He
proceeded to adopt the technique of Goethe. He began to have mental,
imaginary conversations with a multi-millionaire banker friend of his
who used to congratulate him on his wise and sound judgment, and
compliment him on his purchase of the right stocks. He used to
dramatize this imaginary conversation until he had psychologically
fixed it as a form of belief in his mind.
This broker’s inner talking and controlled imagination certainly
agreed with his aim, which was to make sound invest-ments for his
clients. His main purpose in life was to make money for his clients
and to see them prosper financially by his wise counsel. He is still
using his subconscious mind in his busi-ness, and he is a brilliant
success in his field of endeavor.
• Boy of sixteen years turns failure into success
A young boy who was attending high school said to me, “I am
getting very poor grades. My memory is failing. I do not know what is
the matter.” I discovered that the only thing wrong with this boy was
his attitude, which was one of indifference (sự lãnh đạm, thờ ơ) and
resentment (sự oán giận) toward some of his teachers and fellow
students. I taught him how to use his subconscious mind, and how to
succeed in his studies.
He began to affirm certain truths several times a day particularly at
night prior to sleep, and also in the morning after awakening. These
are the best times to impregnate (làm thấm nhuần) the subconscious
mind.
He affirmed as follows: “I realize that my subconscious mind is a
storehouse of memory. It retains (giữ lại) everything I read and hear
from my teachers. I have a perfect memory, and the infinite (vô tận, vô
hạn) intelligence in my subconscious mind constantly reveals to me
everything I need to know at all my examinations, whether written or
oral. I radiate love and good will to all my teachers and fellow
students. I sincerely wish for them success and all good things.”
123
This young man is now enjoying a greater freedom than he has ever
known. He is now receiving all “A’s.” He constantly imagines the
teachers and his mother congratulating him on his success in his
studies.
• How to become successful in buying and selling
In buying and selling, remember that your conscious mind is the
starter and your subconscious mind is the motor. You must start the
motor to enable it to perform its work. Your conscious mind is the
dynamo that awakens the power of your subconscious mind.
The first step in conveying your clarified desire, idea, or image to
the deeper mind is to relax, immobilize the attention, get still, and be
quiet. This quiet, relaxed, and peaceful attitude of mind prevents
extraneous matter and false ideas from inter-fering with your mental
absorption of your ideal.
Furthermore, in the quiet, passive, and receptive attitude of mind,
effort is reduced to a minimum.
The second step is to begin to imagine the reality of that which you
desire. For example, you may wish to buy a home, and in your relaxed
state of mind affirm as follows: “The infinite intelligence of my
subconscious mind is all-wise. It reveals to me now the ideal home,
which is central, ideal, is in a lovely environ-ment, meets with all my
requirements, and is commensurate with my income. I am now turning
this request over to my sub-conscious mind, and I know it responds
according to the nature of my request. I release this request with
absolute faith and confidence in the same way that a farmer deposits a
seed in the ground, trusting implicitly in the laws of growth.”
The answer to your prayer may come through an advertise-ment in
the paper, through a friend, or you may be guided directly to a
particular home, which is exactly what you are seeking. There are
many ways by which your prayer may be answered. The principal
knowledge, in which you may place your confidence, is that the
answer always comes, provided you trust the working of your deeper
mind.
124
You may wish to sell a home, land, or any kind of prop-erty. In
private consultation with real estate brokers I have told them of the
way I sold my own home on Orlando Avenue in Los Angeles. Many
of them have applied the technique I used with remarkable and speedy
results. I placed a sign which read, “For sale by owner” in the garden
in front of my home. The day after I said to myself as I was going to
sleep, “Supposing you sold your house, what would you do?”
I answered my own question and I said, “I would take that sign
down and throw it into the garage.” In my imagination I took hold of
the sign, pulled it up from the ground, placed it on my shoulder, went
to the garage, threw it on the floor, and said jokingly to the sign, “I
don’t need you any more!” I felt the inner satisfaction of it all,
realizing it was finished.
The next day a man gave me a deposit of $1,000 and said to me,
“Take your sign down. We will go into escrow now.”
Immediately I pulled the sign up and took it to the garage. The outer
action conformed to the inner. There is nothing new about this. As
within, so without, meaning according to the image impressed on your
subconscious mind, so it is on the objective screen of your life. The
outside mirrors the inside. External action follows internal action.
Here is another very popular method used in selling homes, land, or
any kind of property. Affirm slowly, quietly, and feelingly as follows:
“Infinite intelligence attracts to me the buyer for this home who wants
it and who prospers in it. This buyer is being sent to me by the
creative intelligence of my subconscious mind, which makes no
mistakes. This buyer may look at many other homes, but mine is the
only one he wants and will buy, because he is guided by the infinite
intelligence within him. I know the buyer is right, the time is right,
and the price is right. Everything about it is right. The deeper currents
of my subconscious mind are now in operation bringing both of us
together in divine order. I know that it is so.”
Remember always, that what you are seeking is also seeking you,
and whenever you want to sell a home or property of any kind, there is
125
always someone who wants what you have to offer By using the
powers of your subconscious mind correctly, you free your mind of all
sense of competition and anxiety in buying and selling.
• How she succeeded in getting what she wanted
There is a young lady who regularly comes to my lectures and
classes. She had to change buses three times; it took her one and a half
hours each time to come to the lectures. In one lecture I explained how
a young man who needed a car in his work received one.
She went home and experimented as outlined in my lecture. Here is
her letter in part, narrating her application of my method, and
published by her permission:
Dear Dr. Murphy:
This is how I received a Cadillac car—I wanted one to come to the
lectures regularly. In my imagination I went through the identical
process I would go through if I were actually driving a car. I went to
the showroom, and the sales-man took me for a ride in one. I also
drove it several blocks. I claimed the Cadillac car as my own over and
over again.
I kept the mental picture of getting into the car, driving it, feeling
the upholstery, etc., consistently for over two weeks. Last week I
drove to your lectures in a Cadillac. My uncle in Inglewood passed
away, and left me his Cadillac and his entire estate.
• A success technique employed by many outstanding executives
and businessmen
There are many prominent businessmen who quietly use the abstract
term, “success,” over and over many times a day until they reach a
conviction that success is theirs. They know that the idea of success
contains all the essential elements of success. Likewise, you can begin
now to repeat the word, “suc-cess,” to yourself with faith and
conviction. Your subconscious mind will accept it as true of you, and
you will be under a subconscious compulsion to succeed.
126
You are compelled to express your subjective beliefs, im-pressions,
and convictions. What does success imply to you? You want,
undoubtedly, to be successful in your home life and in your
relationship with others. You wish to be outstanding in your chosen
work or profession. You wish to possess a beau-tiful home, and all the
money you need to live comfortably and happily. You want to be
successful in your prayer life and in your contact with the powers of
your subconscious mind.
You are a businessman also because you are in the busi-ness of
living. Become a successful businessman by imagining yourself doing
what you long to do, and possessing the things you long to possess.
Become
imaginative; mentally participate in the reality of the successful
state. Make a habit of it. Go to sleep feeling successful every night,
and perfectly satisfied, and you will eventually succeed in implanting
the idea of success in your subconscious mind. Believe you were born
to succeed, and wonders will happen as you pray!
• Profitable pointers
1. Success means successful living. When you are peaceful, happy,
joyous, and doing what you love to do, you are successful.
2. Find out what you love to do, and then do it. If you don’t know
your true expression, ask for guidance, and the lead will come.
3. Specialize in your particular field and try to know more about it
than anyone else.
4. A successful man is not selfish. His main desire in life is to serve
humanity.
5. There is no true success without peace of mind.
6. A successful man possesses great psychological and spiritual
understanding.
127
7. If you imagine an objective clearly, you will be provided with the
necessities through the wonder-working power of your subconscious
mind.
8. Your thought fused with feeling becomes a subjective belief, and
according to your belief is it done unto you.
9. The power of sustained imagination draws forth the miracleworking powers of your subconscious mind.
10. If you are seeking promotion in your work, imagine your
employer, supervisor, or loved one congratulating you on your
promotion. Make the picture vivid and real. Hear the voice, see the
gestures, and feel the reality of it all. Continue to do this frequently,
and through frequent occupancy of your mind, you will experience the
joy of the answered prayer.
11. Your subconscious mind is a storehouse of memory. For a
perfect memory, affirm frequently: “The infinite intelligence of my
subconscious mind reveals to me everything I need to know at all
times, everywhere.”
12. If you wish to sell a home or property of any kind, affirm
slowly, quietly, and feelingly as follows: “Infinite intelligence attracts
to me the buyer for this house or property, who wants it, and who
prospers in it.” Sustain this awareness, and the deeper currents of your
subconscious mind will bring it to pass.
13. The idea of success contains all the elements of success. Repeat
the word, “success,” to yourself frequently with faith and conviction,
and you will be under a subconscious com-pulsion to succeed.
• Scientists Use the Subconscious Mind
Many scientists realize the true importance of the sub-conscious
mind. Edison, Marconi, Kettering, Poincarè, Ein-stein, and many
others have used the subconscious mind. It has given them the insight
and the “know-how” for all their great achievements in modern
science and industry. Research has shown that the ability to bring into
128
action the subconscious power has determined the success of all the
great scientific and research workers.
An instance of how a famous chemist, Friedrich von Stradonitz,
used his subconscious mind to solve his problem is as follows: He had
been working laboriously for a long time trying to rearrange the six
carbon and the six hydrogen atoms of the benzine formula, and he was
constantly perplexed and unable to solve the matter. Tired and
exhausted, he turned the request over completely to his subconscious
mind. Shortly after-ward, as he was about to board a London bus, his
subconscious presented his conscious mind with a sudden flash of a
snake biting its own tail and turning around like a pin wheel. This
answer, from his subconscious mind, gave him the longsought answer
of the circular rearrangement of the atoms that is known as the
benzine ring.
• How a distinguished scientist brought forth his inventions
Nikola Tesla was a brilliant electrical scientist who brought forth
the most amazing innovations. When an idea for a new invention
came into his mind, he would build it up in his imagina-tion, knowing
that his subconscious mind would reconstruct and reveal to his
conscious mind all the parts needed for its manufacture in concrete
form.
Through quietly contemplating every possible improvement, he
spent no time in correcting defects, and was able to give the
technicians the perfect product of his mind.
He said, “Invariably, my device works as I imagined it should. In
twenty years there has not been a single exception.”
• How a famous naturalist solved his problem
Professor Agassiz, a distinguished American naturalist, discovered
the indefatigable activities of his subconscious mind while he slept.
His widow in her biography of her famous husband has reported the
following.
129
 “He had been for two weeks striving to decipher the some-what
obscure impression of a fossil fish on the stone slab in which it was
preserved. Weary and perplexed, he put his work aside at last, and
tried to dismiss it from his mind. Shortly after, he waked one night
persuaded that while asleep he had seen his fish with all the missing
features perfectly restored. But when he tried to hold and make fast
the image it escaped him. Nevertheless, he went early to the Jardin des
Plantes, thinking that on looking anew at the impression he should see
something, which would put him on the track of his vision. In vain—
the blurred record was as black as ever. The next night he saw the fish
again, but with no more satisfactory result. When he awoke it
disappeared from his memory as before. Hoping that the same
experience might be repeated, on the third night he placed a pencil and
paper beside his bed before going to sleep.
“Accordingly, toward morning the fish reappeared in his dream,
confusedly at first, but at last with such distinctness that he had no
longer any doubt as to its zoological characters. Still half dreaming, in
perfect darkness, he traced these charac-ters on the sheet of paper at
the bedside. In the morning he was surprised to see in his nocturnal
sketch features, which he thought it impossible the fossil itself should
reveal. He hastened to the Jardin des Plantes, and, with his drawing as
a guide, succeeded in chiseling away the surface of the stone under
which portions of the fish proved to be hidden.
When wholly exposed it cor-responded with his dream and his
drawing, and he succeeded in classifying it with ease.”
• An outstanding physician solved the problem of diabetes
Some years ago I received a clipping from a magazine describing
the origin of the discovery of insulin. This is the essence of the article
as I recall it.
About forty years ago or more, Dr. Frederick Banting, a brilliant
Canadian physician and surgeon, was concentrating his attention on
the ravages of diabetes. At that time medical science offered no
effective method of arresting the disease. Dr. Banting spent
130
considerable time experimenting and study-ing the international
literature on the subject. One night he was exhausted and fell asleep.
While asleep, his subconscious mind instructed him to extract the
residue from the degenerated pancreatic duct of dogs. This was the
origin of insulin which has helped millions of people.
You will note that Dr. Banting had been consciously dwell-ing on
the problem for some time seeking a solution, a way out, and his
subconscious responded accordingly.
It does not follow that you will always get an answer overnight. The
answer may not come for some time. Do not be discouraged. Keep on
turning the problem over every night to the subconscious mind prior
to sleep, as if you had never done it before.
One of the reasons for the delay may be that you look upon it as a
major problem. You may believe it will take a long time to solve it.
Your subconscious mind is timeless and spaceless. Go to sleep
believing you have the answer now. Do not postulate the answer in the
future. Have an abiding faith in the outcome. Become convinced now
as you read this book that there is an answer and a perfect solution for
you.
• How a famous scientist and physicist escaped from a Russian
concentration camp
Dr. Lothar von Blenk-Schmidt, a member of the Rocket Society and
an outstanding research electronic engineer, gives the following
condensed summary of how he used his subcon-scious mind to free
himself from certain death at the hands of brutal guards in a Russian
prison camp coal mine. He states as follows:
“I was a prisoner of war in a coal mine in Russia, and I saw men
dying all around me in that prison compound. We were watched over
by brutal guards, arrogant officers, and sharp, fast-thinking
commissars. After a short medical checkup, a quota of coal was
assigned to each person. My quota was three hundred pounds per day.
131
In case any man did not fill his quota, his small food ration was cut
down, and in a short time he was resting in the cemetery.
 “I started concentrating on my escape. I knew that my subconscious
mind would somehow find a way. My home in Germany was
destroyed, my family wiped out; all my friends and former associates
were either killed in the war or were in concentration camps.
“I said to my subconscious mind, ‘I want to go to Los Angeles, and
you will find the way.’ I had seen pictures of Los Angeles and I
remembered some of the boulevards very well as well as some of the
buildings.
“Every day and night I would imagine I was walking down Wilshire
Boulevard with an American girl whom I met in Berlin prior to the
war (she is now my wife). In my imagina-tion we would visit the
stores, ride buses, and eat in the restau-rants. Every night I made it a
special point to drive my imaginary American automobile up and
down the boulevards of Los Angeles. I made all this vivid and real.
These pictures in my mind were as real and as natural to me as one of
the trees out-side the prison camp.
 “Every morning the chief guard would count the prisoners as they
were lined up. He would call out ‘one, two, three,’ etc., and when
seventeen was called out, which was my number in sequence, I
stepped aside. In the meantime, the guard was called away for a
minute or so, and on his return he started by mistake on the next man
as number seventeen. When the crew returned in the evening, the
number of men was the same, and I was not missed, and the discovery
would take a long time.
“I walked out of the camp undetected and kept walking for twentyfour hours, resting in a deserted town the next day. I was able to live
by fishing and killing some wild life. I found coal trains going to
Poland and traveled on them by night, until finally I reached Poland.
With the help of friends, I made my way to Lucerne, Switzerland.
“One evening at the Palace Hotel, Lucerne, I had a talk with a man
and his wife from the United States of America. This man asked me if
132
I would care to be a guest at his home in Santa Monica, California. I
accepted, and when I arrived in Los Angeles, I found that their
chauffeur drove me along Wilshire Boulevard and many other
boulevards, which I had imagined, so vividly in the long months in the
Russian coalmines. I recognized the buildings, which I had seen in my
mind so often. It actually seemed as if I had been in Los Angeles
before. I had reached my goal.
 “I will never cease to marvel at the wonders of the sub-conscious
mind. Truly, it has ways we know not of.”
• How archaeologists and paleontologists reconstruct ancient
scenes
These scientists know that their subconscious mind has a memory of
everything that has ever transpired. As they study the ancient ruins
and fossils, through their imaginative percep-tion, their subconscious
mind aids them in reconstructing the ancient scenes. The dead past
becomes alive and audible once more. Looking at these ancient
temples and studying the pottery, statuary, tools, and household
utensils of these ancient times, the scientist tells us of an age when
there was no language. Communication was done by grunts, groans,
and signs.
The keen concentration and disciplined imagination of the scientist
awakens the latent powers of his subconscious mind enabling him to
clothe the ancient temples with roofs, and surround them with
gardens, pools, and fountains. The fossil remains are clothed with
eyes, sinews, and muscles, and they again walk and talk. The past
becomes the living present, and we find that in mind there is no time
or space. Through disci-plined, controlled, and directed imagination,
you can be a companion of the most scientific and inspired thinkers of
all time.
• How to receive guidance from your subconscious
When you have what you term “a difficult decision” to make, or
when you fail to see the solution to your problem, begin at once to
133
think constructively about it. If you are fearful and worried, you are
not really thinking. True thinking is free from fear.
Here is a simple technique you can use to receive guidance on any
subject: Quiet the mind and still the body. Tell the body to relax; it has
to obey you. It has no volition, initiative, or self-conscious
intelligence. Your body is an emotional disk, which records your
beliefs and impressions.
Mobilize your at-tention; focus your thought on the solution to your
problem. Try to solve it with your conscious mind. Think how happy
you would be about the perfect solution. Sense the feeling you would
have if the perfect answer were yours now. Let your mind play with
this mood in a relaxed way; then drop off to sleep. When you awaken,
and you do not have the answer, get busy about something else.
Probably, when you are preoccupied with some-thing else, the answer
will come into your mind like toast pops out of a toaster.
In receiving guidance from the subconscious mind, the simple way
is the best. This is an illustration: I once lost a valuable ring, which
was an heirloom. I looked everywhere for it and could not locate it. At
night I talked to the subconscious in the same manner that I would talk
to anyone. I said to it prior to dropping off to sleep, “You know all
things; you know where that ring is, and you now reveal to me where
it is.”
In the morning I awoke suddenly with the words ringing in my ear,
“Ask Robert!”
I thought it very strange that I should ask Robert, a young boy about
nine years of age; however, I followed the inner voice of intuition.
Robert said, “Oh, yes, I picked it up in the yard while I was playing
with the boys. I placed it on the desk in my room. I did not think it
worth anything, so I did not say anything about it.” The subconscious
mind will always answer you if you trust it.
134
• His subconscious revealed the location of his father’s will
A young man who attends my lectures had this experi-ence. His
father died and apparently left no will. However, this man’s sister told
him that their father had confided to her that a will had been executed
which was fair to all. Every attempt to locate the will failed.
Prior to sleep he talked to his deeper mind as follows: “I now turn
this request over the subconscious mind. It knows just where that will
is, and reveals it to me.” Then he condensed his request down to one
word, “Answer,” repeating it over and over again as a lullaby. He
lulled himself to sleep with the word, “Answer.”
The next morning this young man had an overpowering hunch to go
to a certain bank in Los Angeles where he found a safe deposit vault
registered in the name of his father, the contents of which solved all
his problems.
Your thought, as you go to sleep, arouses the powerful latency,
which is within you. For example, let us suppose you are wondering
whether to sell your home, buy a certain stock, sever partnership,
move to New York or stay in Los Angeles, dissolve the present
contract or take a new one. Do this: Sit quietly in your armchair or at
the desk in your office. Remem-ber that there is a universal law of
action and reaction. The action is your thought. The reaction is the
response from your subconscious mind. The subconscious mind is
reactive and reflexive; this is its nature. It rebounds, rewards, and
repays. It is the law of correspondence. It responds by corresponding.
As you contemplate right action, you will automatically experi-ence a
reaction or response in yourself, which represents the guidance or
answer of your subconscious mind.
In seeking guidance, you simply think quietly about right action,
which means that you are using the infinite intelligence resident in the
subconscious mind to the point where it begins to use you. From there
on, your course of action is directed and controlled by the subjective
wisdom within you, which is all wise and omnipotent. Your decision
will be right.
135
There will only be right action because you are under a subjective
compulsion to do the right thing. I use the word compulsion because
the law of the subconscious is compulsion.
• The secret of guidance
The secret of guidance or right action is to mentally devote yourself
to the right answer, until you find its response in you. The response is
a feeling, an inner awareness, and an overpowering hunch whereby
you know that you know. You have used the power to the point where
it begins to use you. You cannot possibly fail or make one false step
while operating under the subjective wisdom within you. You will
find that all your ways are pleasantness and all your paths are peace.
• Highlights to recall
1. Remember that the subconscious mind has determined the
success and wonderful achievements of all great scientific workers.
2. By giving your conscious attention and devotion to the solu-tion
of a perplexing problem, your subconscious mind gathers all the
necessary information and presents it full-blown to the conscious
mind.
3. If you are wondering about the answer to a problem, try to solve
it objectively. Get all the information you can from research and also
from others. If no answer comes, turn it over to your subconscious
mind prior to sleep, and the an-swer always comes. It never fails.
4. You do not always get the answer overnight. Keep on turn-ing
your request over to your subconscious until the daybreaks and the
shadows flee away.
5. You delay the answer by thinking it will take a long time or that it
is a major problem. Your subconscious has no prob-lem it knows only
the answer.
6. Believe that you have the answer now. Feel the joy of the answer
and the way you would feel if you had the perfect answer. Your
subconscious will respond to your feeling.
136
7. Any mental picture, backed by faith and perseverance, will come
to pass through the miracle-working power of your subconscious.
Trust it, believe in its power, and wonders will happen as you pray.
8. Your subconscious is the storehouse of memory, and within your
subconscious are recorded all your experiences since childhood.
9. Scientists meditating on ancient scrolls, temples, fossils, etc., are
able to reconstruct scenes of the past and make them alive today.
Their subconscious mind comes to their aid.
10. Turn over your request for a solution to your subconscious prior
to sleep. Trust it and believe in it, and the answer will come. It knows
all and sees all, but you must not doubt or question its powers.
11. The action is your thought, and the reaction is the response of
your subconscious mind. If your thoughts are wise, your actions and
decisions will be wise.
12. Guidance comes as a feeling, an inner awareness, an overpowering hunch whereby you know that you know. It is an inner sense
of touch. Follow it.
137
13
Your Subconscious and the Wonders of
Sleep
You spend about eight out of every twenty-four hours, or one-third
of your entire life, in sleep. This is an inexorable law of life. This also
applies to the animal and vegetable kingdoms. Sleep is a divine law,
and many answers to our problems come to us when we are sound
asleep upon the bed.
Many people have advocated the theory that you get tired during the
day, that you go to sleep to rest the body, and that a reparative process
takes place while you sleep. Nothing rests in sleep. Your heart, lungs,
and all your vital organs func-tion while you are asleep. If you eat
prior to sleep, the food is digested and assimilated; also, your skin
secretes perspiration, and your nails and hair continue to grow.
Your subconscious mind never rests or sleeps. It is always active,
controlling all your vital forces. The healing process takes place more
rapidly while you are asleep as there is no inter-ference from your
conscious mind. Remarkable answers are given to you while you are
asleep.
• Why we sleep
Dr. John Bigelow, a famous research authority on sleep,*
demonstrated that at night while asleep you receive impressions
showing that the nerves of the eyes, ears, nose, and taste buds are
active during sleep, and also that the nerves of your brain are quite
active. He says that the main reason we sleep is be-
* Dr. John Bigelow, The Mystery of Sleep (New York and London:
Harper Brothers, 1903). cause “the nobler part of the soul is united by
abstraction to our higher nature and becomes a participant in the
wisdom and foreknowledge of the gods.”
138
Dr. Bigelow states also, “The results of my studies have not only
strengthened my convictions that the supposed exemp-tion from
customary toils and activities was not the final pur-pose of sleep, but
have also made clearer to my mind the conviction that no part of a
man’s life deserves to be considered more indispensable to its
symmetrical and perfect spiritual development than the while he is
separated from the phenomenal world in sleep.”
• Prayer, a form of sleep
Your conscious mind gets involved with vexations, strife, and
contentions of the day, and it is very necessary to withdraw
periodically from sense evidence and the objective world, and
commune silently with the inner wisdom of your subconscious mind.
By claiming guidance, strength, and greater intelligence in all phases
of your life, you will be enabled to overcome all difficulties and solve
your daily problems.
This regular withdrawal from sense evidence and the noise and
confusion of everyday living is also a form of sleep, i.e., you become
asleep to the world of the senses and alive to the wisdom and power of
your subconscious mind.
• Startling effects of sleep deprivation
Lack of sleep can cause you to become irritable, moody, and
depressed.
Dr. George Stevenson of the National Associa-tion for Mental
Health says, “I believe it can safely be said that all human beings need
a minimum of six hours’ sleep to be healthy. Most people need more.
Those who think they can get along on less are fooling themselves.”
Medical research scholars, investigating sleep processes and
deprivation of sleep, point out that severe insomnia has preceded
psychotic breakdown in some instances. Remember, you are
spiritually recharged during sleep, and adequate sleep is essential to
produce joy and vitality in life.
139
• You need more sleep
Robert O’Brien, in an article, “Maybe You Need More Sleep,” in an
issue of The Reader¶s Digest, reports the following experiment on
sleep: “For the last three years experiments have been in progress at
Walter Reed Army Institute of Research in Washington, D.C.
Subjects—more than one hundred military and civilian volun-teers—
have been kept awake for as long as four days. Thousands of tests
have measured the effects on their behavior and per-sonality. Results
of these tests have given scientists astonishingly new insights into the
mysteries of sleep.
“They now know that the tired brain apparently craves sleep so
hungrily that it will sacrifice anything to get it. After only a few hours
of sleep loss, fleeting stolen naps called ‘lapses,’ or micro-sleep,
occurred at the rate of three or four an hour. As in real sleep, eyelids
drooped, heartbeat slowed.
Each lapse lasted just a fraction of a second. Sometimes the lapses
were periods of blankness; sometimes they were filled with images,
wisps of dreams. As hours of sleep loss mounted, the lapses took place
more often and lasted longer, perhaps two or three seconds. Even if
the subjects had been piloting an airliner in a thunderstorm, they still
couldn’t have resisted micro-sleeps for those few priceless seconds.
And it can happen to you, as many who have fallen asleep at the
wheel of a car can testify.
“Another startling effect of sleep deprivation was its at-tack on
human memory and perception. Many sleep-deprived subjects were
unable to retain information long enough to relate it to the task they
were supposed to perform. They were totally befuddled in situations
requiring them to hold several factors in mind and act on them, as a
pilot must when he skillfully in-tegrates wind direction, air speed,
altitude, and glide path to make a safe landing.”
• Sleep brings counsel
A young lady in Los Angeles who listens to my morning radio talks
told me that she had been offered a lucrative position in New York
140
City at twice her present salary. She was wondering whether to accept
or not and prayed prior to sleep as follows: “The creative intelligence
of my subconscious mind knows what is best for me. Its tendency is
always lifeward, and it reveals to me the right decision, which blesses
all concerned. I give thanks for the answer which I know will come to
me.”
She repeated this simple prayer over and over again as a lullaby
prior to sleep, and in the morning she had a persistent feeling that she
should not accept the offer. She rejected the offer and subsequent
events verified her inward sense of know-ing, because the company
went bankrupt in a few months fol-lowing their offer of employment
to her. The conscious mind may be correct on the facts objectively
known, but the intuitive faculty of her subconscious mind saw the
failure of the concern in question, and prompted her ac-cordingly.
• Saved from certain disaster
I will illustrate how the wisdom of your subconscious mind can
instruct you and protect you relative to your request for right action as
you go to sleep.
Many years ago, before the Second World War, I was offered a very
lucrative assignment in the Orient, and I prayed for guidance and the
right decision as follows: “Infinite intelli-gence within me knows all
things, and the right decision is revealed to me in divine order. I will
recognize the answer when it comes.”
I repeated this simple prayer over and over again as a lullaby prior
to sleep, and in a dream came the vivid realization of things to come
three years hence. An old friend appeared in the dream and said,
“Read these headlines—do not go!” The headlines of the newspaper,
which appeared in the dream, related to war and the attack on Pearl
Harbor.
Occasionally, the writer dreams literally. The aforemen-tioned
dream was undoubtedly a dramatization of the subcon-scious mind
which projected a person whom I trusted and respected. To some a
warning may come in the form of a mother who appears in a dream.
141
She tells the person not to go here or there, and the reason for the
warning. Your subconscious mind is all-wise. It knows all things.
Oftentimes it will speak to you only in a voice that your conscious
mind will immediately accept as true. Sometimes your subconscious
will warn you in a voice which sounds like that of your mother or
some loved one which may cause you to stop on the street, and you
find, if you had gone another foot, a falling object from a window
might have struck you on the head.
My subconscious mind is one with the universal subcon-scious, and
it knew the Japanese were planning a war, and it also knew when the
war would start.
Dr. Rhine, director of the Department of Psychology at Duke
University, has gathered together a vast amount of evi-dence showing
that a great number of people all over the world see events before they
happen, and in many instances are, therefore, able to avoid the tragic
event which was foreseen vividly in a dream.
The dream which I had showed clearly the headlines in The New
York Times about three years prior to the tragedy of Pearl Harbor. In
consequence of this dream, I immediately cancelled the trip as I felt a
subconscious compulsion to do so. Three years later the Second
World War proved the truth of the inner voice of intuition.
• Your future is in your subconscious mind
Remember that the future, the result of your habitual think-ing, is
already in your mind except when you change it through prayer. The
future of a country, likewise, is in the collective subconscious of the
people of that nation. There is nothing strange in the dream I had
wherein I saw the headlines of the New York newspapers long before
the war began. The war had already taken place in mind, and all the
plans of attack were already engraved on that great recording
instrument, the subconscious mind or collective unconscious of the
universal mind. Tomorrow’s events are in your subconscious mind, so
are next week’s and next month’s, and they may be seen by a highly
psychic or clairvoyant person.
142
No disaster or tragedy can happen to you if you decide to pray.
Nothing is predetermined or foreordained. Your mental attitude, i.e.,
the way you think, feel, and believe determines your destiny. You can,
through scientific prayer, which is ex-plained in a previous chapter,
mold, fashion, and create your own future. Whatsoever a man soweth,
that shall he also reap.
• A cat nap nets him $15,000
One of my students mailed me a newspaper clipping three or four
years ago about a man called Ray Hammerstrom, a roller at the steel
works in Pittsburgh operated by Jones and Laughlin Steel
Corporation. He received $15,000 for his dream.
According to the article, the engineers could not fix a faulty switch
in a newly installed bar mill which controlled the delivery of straight
bars to the cooling beds. The engineers worked on the switch about
eleven or twelve times to no avail.
Hammerstrom thought a lot about the problem and tried to figure
out a new design, which might work. Nothing worked. One afternoon
he lay down for a nap, and prior to sleep he began to think about the
answer to the switch problem. He had a dream in which a perfect
design for the switch was portrayed. When he awoke, he sketched his
new design according to the outline of his dream.
This visionary catnap won Hammerstrom a check for $15,000; the
largest award the firm ever gave an employee for a new idea.
• How a famous professor solved his problem in sleep
Dr. H. V. Helprecht, Professor of Assyrian at the Uni-versity of
Pennsylvania, wrote as follows: “One Saturday eve-ning... I had been
wearying myself, in the vain attempt to decipher two small fragments
of agate which were supposed to belong to the finger rings of some
Babylonians.
“About midnight, weary and exhausted, I went to bed and dreamed
the following remarkable dream: A tall, thin priest of Nippur, about
143
forty years of age, led me to the treasure chamber of the temple . . . a
small, low-ceilinged room without windows, while scraps of agate and
lapis-lazuli lay scattered on the floor. Here he addressed me as
follows: ‘The two fragments which you have published separately on
pages 22 and 26 belong together, are not finger rings... The first two
rings served as earrings for the statue of the god; the two fragments
(you have)... are the portions of them. If you will put them together
you will have confirmation of my words.’ ... I awoke at once... I
examined the fragments... and to my astonishment found the dream
verified. The problem was then at last solved.”
This demonstrates clearly the creative manifestation of his
subconscious mind, which knew the answer to all his problems.
• How the subconscious worked for a famous writer while he slept
Robert Louis Stevenson in one of his books, Across the Plains,
devotes a whole chapter to dreams. He was a vivid dreamer and had
the persistent habit of giving specific instruc-tions to his subconscious
every night prior to sleep. He would request his subconscious to
evolve stories for him while he slept. For example, if Stevenson’s
funds were at low ebb, his command to his subconscious would be
something like this: “Give me a good thrilling novel which will be
marketable and profitable.” His subconscious responded
magnificently.
Stevenson says, “These little brownies [the intelligences and powers
of his subconscious] can tell me a story piece by piece, like a serial,
and keep me, its supposed creator, all the while in total ignorance of
where they aim.”
And he added: “That part of my work which is done when I am up
and about [while he is consciously aware and awake] is by no means
necessarily mine, since all goes to show that the brownies have a hand
in it even then.”
• Sleep in peace and wake in joy
144
To those who suffer from insomnia, you will find the following
prayer very effective. Repeat it slowly, quietly, and lovingly prior to
sleep: “My toes are relaxed, my ankles are relaxed, my abdominal
muscles are relaxed, my heart and lungs are relaxed, my hands and
arms are relaxed, my neck is re-laxed, my brain is relaxed, my face is
relaxed, my eyes are relaxed, my whole mind and body are relaxed. I
fully and freely forgive everyone, and I sincerely wish for them
harmony, health, peace, and all the blessings of me. I am at peace; I
am poised, serene, and calm. I rest in security and in peace. A great
stillness steals over me, and a great calm quiets my whole being as I
realize the Divine Presence within me. I know that the realization of
life and love heals me. I wrap myself in the mantle of love and fall
asleep filled with good will for all. Throughout the night peace
remains with me, and in the morning I shall be filled with life and
love. A circle of love is drawn around me. I will fear no evil, for Thou
art with me. I sleep in peace, I wake in joy, and in Him I live, move,
and have my being´
• Summary of your aids to the wonders of sleep
1. If you are worried that you will not wake up on time, sug-gest to
your subconscious mind prior to sleep the exact time you wish to
arise, and it will awaken you. It needs no clock. Do the same thing
with all problems. There is nothing too hard for your subconscious.
2. Your subconscious never sleeps. It is always on the job. It
controls all your vital functions. Forgive yourself and every-one else
before you go to sleep, and healing will take place much more rapidly.
3. Guidance is given you while you are asleep, sometimes in a
dream. The healing currents are also released, and in the morning you
feel refreshed and rejuvenated.
4. When troubled by the vexations and strife of the day, still the
wheels of your mind and think about the wisdom and intelligence
lodged in your subconscious mind, which is ready to respond to you.
This will give you peace, strength, and confidence.
145
5. Sleep is essential for peace of mind and health of body. Lack of
sleep can cause irritation, depression, and mental disorders. You need
eight hours’ sleep.
6. Medical research scholars point out that insomnia precedes
psychotic breakdowns.
7. You are spiritually recharged during sleep. Adequate sleep is
essential for joy and vitality in life.
8. Your tired brain craves sleep so hungrily that it will sacri-fice
anything to get it. Many who have fallen asleep at the wheel of an
automobile can testify to this.
9. Many sleep-deprived people have poor memories and lack proper
coordination. They become befuddled, confused, and disorientated.
10. Sleep brings counsel. Prior to sleep, claim that the infinite
intelligence of your subconscious mind is guiding and di-recting you.
Then, watch for the lead, which comes, perhaps on awakening.
11. Trust your subconscious completely. Know that its tendency is
always lifeward. Occasionally, your subconscious answers you in a
very vivid dream and a vision in the night. You can be forewarned in a
dream in the same way as the author of this book was warned.
12. Your future is in your mind now, based on your habitual
thinking and beliefs. Claim infinite intelligence leads and guides you
and that all good is yours, and your future will be wonderful. Believe
it and accept it. Expect the best, and invariably the best will come to
you.
13. If you are writing a novel, play, or book, or are working on an
invention, speak to your subconscious mind at night and claim boldly
that its wisdom, intelligence, and power are guiding, directing, and
revealing to you the ideal play, novel, book, or revealing the perfect
solution whatever it may be. Wonders will happen as you pray this
way.
146
14
Your Subconscious Mind and Marital
Problems
Ignorance of the functions and powers of the mind is the cause of all
marital trouble. Each using the law of mind correctly can solve
friction between husband and wife. By praying together they stay
together. The contemplation of divine ideals, the study of the laws of
life, the mutual agreement on a common purpose and plan, and the
enjoyment of personal freedom bring about that harmonious marriage,
that wedded bliss, that sense of oneness where the two become one.
The best time to prevent divorce is before marriage. It is not wrong
to try to get out of a very bad situation. But, why get into the bad
situation in the first place? Would it not be better to give attention to
the real cause of marital problems, in other words, to really get at the
root of the matter involved?
As with all other problems of men and women, the prob-lems of
divorce, separation, annulment, and endless litigation are directly
traceable to lack of knowledge of the working and interrelationship of
the conscious and subconscious mind.
• The meaning of marriage
Marriage to be real must first be on a spiritual basis. It must be of
the heart, and the heart is the chalice of love. Honesty, sincerity,
kindness, and integrity are also forms of love. Each partner should be
perfectly honest and sincere with the other. It is not a true marriage
when a man marries a woman for her money, social position, or to lift
his ego, because this indicates a lack of sincerity, honesty, and true
love. Such a marriage is a farce, a sham, and a masquerade.
When a woman says, “I am tired working; I want to get married
because I want security,” her premise is false. She is not using the
laws of mind correctly. Her security depends upon her knowledge of
147
the interaction of the conscious and subconscious mind and its
application.
For example, a woman will never lack for wealth or health if she
applies the techniques outlined in the respective chapters of this book.
Her wealth can come to her independent of her husband, father, or
anyone else. A woman is not dependent on her husband for health,
peace, joy, inspiration, guidance, love, wealth, security, happiness, or
anything in the world. Her security and peace of mind come from her
knowledge of the inner powers within her and from the constant use of
the laws of her own mind in a constructive fashion.
• How to attract the ideal husband
You are now acquainted with the way your subconscious mind
works. You know that whatever you impress upon it will be
experienced in your world. Begin now to impress your sub-conscious
mind with the qualities and characteristics you desire in a man.
The following is an excellent technique: Sit down at night in your
armchair, close your eyes, let go, relax the body, become very quiet,
passive, and receptive. Talk to your subconscious mind and say to it,
“I am now attracting a man into my ex-perience who is honest,
sincere, loyal, faithful, peaceful, happy, and prosperous. These
qualities, which I admire, are sinking down into my subconscious
mind now. As I dwell upon these characteristics, they become a part
of me and are embodied subconsciously.
“I know there is an irresistible law of attraction and that I attract to
me a man according to my subconscious belief. I at-tract that which I
feel to be true in my subconscious mind.
“I know I can contribute to his peace and happiness. He loves my
ideals, and I love his ideals. He does not want to make me over;
neither do I want to make him over. There is mutual love, freedom,
and respect.”
Practice this process of impregnating your subconscious mind.
Then, you will have the joy of attracting to you a man possessing the
148
qualities and characteristics you mentally dwelt upon. Your
subconscious intelligence will open up a pathway, whereby both of
you will meet, according to the irresistible and changeless flow of
your own subconscious mind. Have a keen desire to give the best that
is in you of love, devotion, and co-operation.
Be receptive to this gift of love, which you have given to your
subconscious mind.
• How to attract the ideal wife
Affirm as follows: “I now attract the right woman who is in
complete accord with me. This is a spiritual union because it is divine
love functioning through the personality of someone with whom I
blend perfectly. I know I can give to this woman love, light, peace,
and joy. I feel and believe I can make this woman’s life full, complete,
and wonderful. “I now decree that she possesses the following
qualities and attributes: She is spiritual, loyal, faithful, and true. She
is har-monious, peaceful, and happy. We are irresistibly attracted to
each other. Only that which belongs to love, truth, and beauty can
enter my experience. I accept my ideal companion now.”
As you think quietly and with interest on the qualities and attributes,
which you admire in the companion you seek, you will build the
mental equivalent into your mentality. Then, the deeper currents of
your subconscious mind will bring both of you together in divine
order.
• No need for third mistake
Recently a teacher said to me, “I have had three husbands and all
three have been passive, submissive, and dependent on me to make all
decisions and govern everything. Why do I attract such type men?”
I asked her whether she had known that her second hus-band was
the
effeminate type, and she replied, “Of course not. Had I known, I
would not have married him.” Apparently she had not learned
anything from the first mistake. The trouble was with her personality
149
make-up. She was very masculine, domineering, and unconsciously
wanted someone who would be submissive and passive so that she
could play the dominant role. All this was unconscious motivation,
and her subconscious pic-ture attracted to her what she subjectively
wanted. She had to learn to break the pattern by adopting the right
prayer process.
• How she broke the negative pattern
The above-mentioned woman learned a simple truth. When you
believe you can have the type of man you idealize, it is done unto you,
as you believe. The following is the specific prayer she used to break
the old subconscious pattern and attract to her the ideal mate: “I am
building into my mentality the type of man I deeply desire. The man I
attract for a husband is strong, powerful, loving, very masculine,
successful, honest, loyal, and faithful. He finds love and happiness
with me. I love to follow where he leads.
“I know he wants me, and I want him. I am honest, sincere, loving,
and kind. I have wonderful gifts to offer him. They are good will, a
joyous heart, and a healthy body. He offers me the same. It is mutual.
I give and I receive.
Divine intelligence knows where this man is, and the deeper
wisdom of my subconscious mind is now bringing both of us together
in its own way, and we recognize each other immediately. I release
this request to my subconscious mind, which knows how to bring my
request to pass. I give thanks for the perfect answer.”
She prayed in the above manner night and morning, affirm-ing these
truths and knowing that through frequent occupation of the mind she
would reach the mental equivalent of that which she sought.
• The answer to her prayer
Several months went by. She had a great number of dates and social
engagements, none of which was agreeable to her. When she was
about to question, waiver, doubt, and vacillate, she reminded herself
that the infinite intelligence was bringing it to pass in its own way and
150
that there was nothing to be con-cerned about. Her final decree in her
divorce proceedings was granted which brought her a great sense of
release and mental freedom.
Shortly afterward she went to work as a receptionist in a doctor’s
office. She told me that the minute she saw the physician she knew he
was the man she was praying about. Apparently he knew it, too,
because he proposed to her the first week she was in the office, and
their subsequent marriage was ideally happy. This physician was not
the passive or submissive type, but was a real man, a former football
player, an outstanding athlete, and was a deeply spiritual man though
he was completely devoid of any sectarian or denominational
affiliation.
She got what she prayed for because she claimed it men-tally until
she reached the point of saturation. In other words, she mentally and
emotionally united with her idea, and it became a part of her in the
same way that an apple becomes a part of her blood stream.
• Should I get a divorce?
Divorce is an individual problem. It cannot be generalized. In some
cases, of course, there never should have been a mar-riage. In some
cases, divorce is not the solution, no more so than marriage is the
solution for a lonely man. Divorce may be right for one person and
wrong for another. A divorced woman may be far more sincere and
noble than many of her married sisters who perhaps are living a lie.
For example, I once talked with a woman whose husband was a
dope fiend, an ex-convict, a wife-beater, and a non-provider. She had
been told it was wrong to get a divorce. I explained to her that
marriage is of the heart. If two hearts blend harmoniously, lovingly,
and sincerely, that is the ideal marriage. The pure action of the heart is
love.
Following this explanation she knew what to do. She knew in her
heart that there is no divine law which compelled her to be
browbeaten, intimidated, and beaten because someone said, “I
pronounce you man and wife.”
151
If you are in doubt as to what to do, ask for guidance, knowing that
there is always an answer, and you will receive it. Follow the lead that
comes to you in the silence of your soul. It speaks to you in peace.
• Drifting into divorce
Recently a young couple, married for only a few months, was
seeking a divorce. I discovered that the young man had a constant fear
that his wife would leave him. He expected rejec-tion, and he believed
that she would be unfaithful. These thoughts haunted his mind, and
became an obsession with him. His mental attitude was one of
separation and suspicion. She felt unresponsive to him; it was his own
feeling or atmosphere of loss and separation operating through them.
This brought about a condition or action in accordance with the
mental pat-tern behind it. There is a law of action and reaction, or
cause and effect. The thought is the action, and the response of the
subconscious mind is the reaction.
His wife left home and asked for a divorce, which is what he feared
and believed she would do.
• Divorce begins in the mind
Divorce takes place first in the mind; the legal proceedings follow
after. These two young people were full of resentment, fear, suspicion,
and anger. These attitudes weaken, exhaust, and debilitate the whole
being. They learned that hate divides and that love unites. They began
to realize what they had been doing with their minds. Neither one of
them knew the law of mental action, nor they were misusing their
minds and bringing on chaos and misery. These two people went back
together at my suggestion and experimented with prayer therapy.
They began to radiate love, peace, and good will to each other. Each
one practiced radiating harmony, health, peace, and love to the other,
and they alternated in the reading of the
Psalms every night. Their marriage is growing more beautiful every
day.
152
• The nagging wife
Many times the reason the wife nags is because she gets no
attention. Oftentimes, it is a craving for love and affection. Give your
wife attention, and show your appreciation. Praise and ex-alt all her
many good points.
There is also the nagging type of woman who wants to make the
man conform to her particular pattern. This is about the quickest way
in the world to get rid of a man.
The wife and the husband must cease being scavengers— always
looking at the petty faults or errors in each other. Let each give
attention and praise for the constructive and wonder-ful qualities in
the other.
• The brooding husband
If a man begins to brood, grows morbid against his wife because of
the things she said or did, he is, psychologically speak-ing,
committing adultery.
One of the meanings of adultery is idolatry, i.e., giving attention to
or uniting mentally with that which is negative and destructive. When
a man is silently re-senting his wife and is full of hostility toward her,
he is unfaithful.
He is not faithful to his marriage vows, which are to love, cherish,
and honor her all the days of his life.
The man who is brooding, bitter, and resentful can swallow his
sharp remarks, abate his anger, and he can go to great lengths to be
considerate, kind, and courteous. He can deftly skirt the differences.
Through praise and mental effort, he can get out of the habit of
antagonism. Then, he will be able to get along better, not only with his
wife, but with business associates also. Assume the harmonious state,
and eventually you will find peace and harmony.
153
•The great mistake
A great mistake is to discuss your marital problems or diffi-culties
with neighbors and relatives. Suppose, for example, a wife says to the
neighbor, “John never gives me any money. He treats my mother
abominably, drinks to excess, and is constantly abusive and insulting.”
Now, this wife is degrading and belittling her husband in the eyes of
all the neighbors and relatives. He no longer appears as the ideal
husband to them. Never discuss your marital prob-lems with anyone
except a trained counselor. Why cause numer-ous people to think
negatively of your marriage? Moreover, as you discuss and dwell
upon these shortcomings of your husband, you are actually creating
these states within yourself. Who is thinking and feeling it? You are!
As you think and feel, so are you.
Relatives will usually give you the wrong advice. It is usu-ally
biased and prejudiced because it is not given in an im-personal way.
Any advice you receive which violates the golden rule, which is a
cosmic law, is not good or sound.
It is well to remember that no two human beings ever lived beneath
the same roof without clashes of temperament, periods of hurts and
strain. Never display the unhappy side of your mar-riage to your
friends. Keep your quarrels to yourself. Refrain from criticism and
condemnation of your partner.
• Don’t try to make your wife over
A husband must not try to make his wife over into a second edition
of himself. The tactless attempt to change her in many ways is foreign
to her nature. These attempts are always foolish, and many times
result in dissolution of the marriage. These attempts to alter her
destroy her pride and self-esteem, and arouse a spirit of contrariness
and resentment that proves fatal to the marriage bond.
Adjustments are needed, of course, but if you have a good look
inside your own mind, and study your character and be-havior, you
will find so many shortcomings, they will keep you busy the rest of
154
your Me. If you say, “I will make him over into what I want,” you are
looking for trouble and the divorce court. You are asking for misery.
You will have to learn the hard way that there is no one to change but
yourself.
• Pray together and stay together through steps in prayer
The first step: Never carry over from one day to another
accumulated irritations arising from little disappointments. Be sure to
forgive each other for any sharpness before you retire at night. The
moment you awaken in the morning, claim infinite intelligence is
guiding you in all your ways. Send out loving thoughts of peace,
harmony, and love to your marriage partner, to all members of the
family, and to the whole world.
The second step: Say grace at breakfast. Give thanks for the
wonderful food, for your abundance, and for all your bless-ings. Make
sure that no problems, worries, or arguments shall enter into the table
conversation; the same applies at dinnertime. Say to your wife or
husband, “I appreciate all you are doing, and I radiate love and good
will to you all day long.”
The third step: The husband and wife should alternate in praying
each night. Do not take your marriage partner for granted. Show your
appreciation and love. Think appreciation and good will, rather than
condemnation, criticism, and nagging. The way to build a peaceful
home and a happy marriage is to use a foundation of love, beauty,
harmony, mutual respect, faith in God, and all things good. Read the
23rd, 27th, and 91st Psalms, the 11th chapter of Hebrews, the 13th
chapter of I Corinthians, and other great texts of the Bible before
going to sleep. As you practice these truths, your marriage will grow
more and more blessed through the years.
155
• Review your actions
1. Ignorance of mental and spiritual laws is the cause of all marital
unhappiness. By praying scientifically together, you stay together.
2. The best time to prevent divorce is before marriage. If you learn
how to pray in the right way, you will attract the right mate for you.
3. Marriage is the union of a man and woman who are bound
together by love. Their hearts beat as one, and they move onward,
upward, and Godward.
4. Marriage does not bequeath happiness. People find hap-piness by
dwelling on the eternal truths of God and the spiritual values of life.
Then, the man and woman can con-tribute to each other’s happiness
and joy.
5. You attract the right mate by dwelling on the qualities and
characteristics you admire in a woman or a man, and then your
subconscious mind will bring you together in divine order.
6. You must build into your mentality the mental equivalent of what
you want in a marriage partner. If you want to attract an honest,
sincere, and loving partner in life, you must be honest, sincere, and
loving yourself.
7. You do not have to repeat mistakes in marriage. When you really
believe you can have the type man or woman you idealize, it is done
unto you, as you believe. To believe is to accept something as true.
Accept your ideal companion now mentally.
8. Do not wonder how, why, or where you will meet the mate you
are praying for. Trust implicitly the wisdom of your subconscious
mind. It has the “know-how,” and you don’t have to assist it.
9. You are mentally divorced when you indulge in peeves, grudges,
ill will, and hostility toward your marriage partner. You are mentally
dwelling with error in the bed of your mind. Adhere to your marriage
vows, “I promise to cherish, love, and honor him (or her) all the days
of my life.”
156
10. Cease projecting fear patterns to your marriage partner. Project
love, peace, harmony, and good will, and your mar-riage will grow
more beautiful and more wonderful through the years.
11. Radiate love, peace, and good will to each other. These
vibrations are picked up by the subconscious mind resulting in mutual
trust, affection, and respect.
12. A nagging wife is usually seeking attention and apprecia-tion.
She is craving for love and affection. Praise and exalt her many good
points. Show her that you love her and ap-preciate her.
13. A man who loves his wife does not do anything unloving or
unkind in word, manner, or action. Love is what love does.
14. In marital problems, always seek expert advice. You would not
go to a carpenter to pull a tooth; neither should you discuss your
marriage problems with relatives or friends. You should go to a
trained person for counsel.
15. Never try to make your wife or husband over. These at-tempts
are always foolish and tend to destroy the pride and self-esteem of the
other. Moreover, it arouses a spirit of resentment that proves fatal to
the marriage bond. Cease trying to make the other a second edition of
yourself.
16. Pray together and you will stay together. Scientific prayer solves
all problems. Mentally picture your wife as she ought to be, joyous,
happy, healthy, and beautiful. See your hus-band, as he ought to be,
strong, powerful, loving, harmoni-ous, and kind. Maintain this mental
picture, and you will experience the marriage made in heaven, which
is harmony and peace.
157
15
Your Subconscious Mind and Your
Happiness
William James, father of American psychology, said that the
greatest discovery of the nineteenth century was not in the realm of
physical science.
The greatest discovery was the power of the subconscious touched
by faith.
In every human being is that limitless reservoir of power, which can
overcome any prob-lem in the world. True and lasting happiness will
come into your life the day you get the clear realization that you can
overcome any weak-ness—the day you realize that your subconscious
can solve your problems, heal your body, and prosper you beyond
your fondest dream.
You might have felt very happy when your child was born, when
you got married, when you graduated from college, or when you won
a great victory or a prize. You might have been very happy when you
became engaged to the loveliest girl or the most handsome man. You
could go on and list innumerable ex-periences, which have made you
happy. However, no matter how marvelous these experiences are, they
do not give real lasting happiness—they are transitory.
The Book of Proverbs gives the answer: Whosoever trusteth in the
Lord, happy is he. When you trust in the Lord (the power and wisdom
of your subconscious mind) to lead, guide, govern, and direct all your
ways, you will become poised, serene, and relaxed. As you radiate
love, peace, and good will to all, you are really building a
superstructure of happiness for all the days of your life.
• You must choose happiness
Happiness is a state of mind. There is a phrase in the Bible which
says, Choose ye this day whom ye will serve. You have the freedom to
158
choose happiness. This may seem extraordinarily simple, and it is.
Perhaps this is why people stumble over the way to happiness; they do
not see the simplicity of the key to happiness. The great things of life
are simple, dynamic, and creative. They produce well-being and
happiness.
St. Paul reveals to you how you can think your way into a life of
dynamic power and happiness in these words: Finally, brethren,
whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever
things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are
lovely, whatsoever things are of good re-port; if there be any virtue,
and if there be any praise, think on these things. PHIL. 4:8.
• How to choose happiness
Begin now to choose happiness. This is how you do it: When you
open your eyes in the morning, say to yourself, “Divine order takes
charge of my life today and every day. All things work together for
good for me today.
This is a new and wonderful day for me. There will never be another
day like this one. I am divinely guided all day long, and whatever I do
will prosper. Divine love surrounds me, enfolds me, and enwraps me,
and I go forth in peace. Whenever my attention wanders away from
that which is good and constructive, I will imme-diately bring it back
to the contemplation of that which is lovely and of good report. I am a
spiritual and mental magnet attracting to myself all things, which bless
and prosper me. I am going to be a wonderful success in all my
undertakings to-day. I am definitely going to be happy all day long.”
Start each day in this manner; then you will be choosing happiness,
and you will be a radiant joyous person.
• He made it a habit to be happy
A number of years ago, I stayed for about a week in a farmer's
house in Connemarra on the west coast of Ireland. He seemed to be
always singing and whistling and was full of humor.
159
I asked him the secret of his happiness, and his reply was: “It is a
habit of mine to be happy. Every morning when I awaken and every
night before I go to sleep, I bless my family, the crops, the cattle, and I
thank God for the wonderful harvest.”
This farmer had made a practice of this for over forty years. As you
know, thoughts repeated regularly and systemati-cally sink into the
subconscious mind and become habitual. He discovered that
happiness is a habit.
• You must desire to be happy
There is one very important point about being happy. You must
sincerely desire to be happy. There are people who have been
depressed, dejected, and unhappy so long that was they suddenly
made happy by some wonderful, good, joyous news, they would
actually be like the woman who said to me, “It is wrong to be so
happy!” They have been so accustomed to the old mental patterns that
they do not feel at home being happy! They long for the former,
depressed, unhappy state.
I knew a woman in England who had rheumatism for many years.
She would pat herself on the knee and say, “My rheuma-tism is bad
today. I cannot go out. My rheumatism keeps me miserable.”
This dear elderly lady got a lot of attention from her son, daughter,
and the neighbors. She really wanted her rheumatism. She enjoyed her
“misery” as she called it. This woman did not really want to be happy.
I suggested a curative procedure to her. I wrote down some biblical
verses and told her that if she gave attention to these truths, her mental
attitude would undoubtedly change and would result in her faith and
confidence in being restored to health. She was not interested. There
seems to be a peculiar, mental, morbid streak in many people,
whereby they seem to enjoy being miserable and sad.
• Why choose unhappiness?
Many people choose unhappiness by entertaining these ideas:
“Today is a black day; everything is going to go wrong.”
160
³I am not going to succeed.” “Everyone is against me.” “Business is
bad, and it is going to get worse.” “I'm always late.” “I never get the
breaks.” “He can, but I can't.” If you have this attitude of mind the
first thing in the morning, you will attract all these experiences to you,
and you will be very unhappy.
Begin to realize that the world you live in is determined largely by
what goes on in your mind. Marcus Aurelius, the great Roman
philosopher and sage, said, “A man's life is what his thoughts make of
it.” Emerson, America's foremost philosopher, said, “A man is what
he thinks all day long.” The thoughts you habitually entertain in your
mind have the tendency to actualize themselves in physical conditions.
Make certain you do not indulge in negative thoughts, de-featist
thoughts, or unkind, depressing thoughts. Recall fre-quently to your
mind that you can experience nothing outside your own mentality.
• If I had a million dollars, I would be happy
I have visited many men in mental institutions who were
millionaires, but they insisted they were penniless and destitute. They
were incarcerated because of psychotic, paranoid, and manicdepressive tendencies. Wealth in and of itself will not make you
happy. On the other hand, it is not a deterrent to happiness. Today,
there are many people trying to buy hap-piness through the purchase
of radios, television sets, automo-biles, a home in the country, a
private yacht, and a swimming pool, but happiness cannot be
purchased or procured in that way.
The kingdom of happiness is in your thought and feeling. Too many
people have the idea that it takes something artificial to produce
happiness.
Some say, “If I were elected mayor, made president of the
organization, promoted to general manager of the corporation, I would
be happy.”
The truth is that happiness is a mental and spiritual state. None of
these positions mentioned will necessarily bequeath happiness. Your
161
strength, joy, and happiness consist in finding out the law of divine
order and right action lodged in your subconscious mind and by
applying these principles in all phases of your life.
• He found happiness to be the harvest of a quiet mind
Lecturing in San Francisco some years ago, I interviewed a man
who was very unhappy and dejected over the way his business was
going. He was the general manager. His heart was filled with
resentment toward the vice president and the presi-dent of the
organization. He claimed that they opposed him. Because of this
internal strife, business was declining; he was receiving no dividends
or stock bonuses.
This is how he solved his business problem: The first thing in the
morning he affirmed quietly as follows, “All those work-ing in our
corporation are honest, sincere, co-operative, faithful, and full of good
will to all. They are mental and spiritual links in the chain of this
corporation's growth, welfare, and prosperity. I radiate love, peace,
and good will in my thoughts, words, and deeds to my two associates
and to all those in the company. The president and the vice president
of our company are divinely guided in all their undertakings. The
infinite intelligence of my subconscious mind makes all decisions
through me. There is only right action in all our business transactions
and in our relationship with each other. I send the messengers of
peace, love, and good will before me to the office. Peace and harmony
reign supreme in the minds and hearts of all those in the com-pany
including myself. I now go forth into a new day, full of faith,
confidence, and trust.”
This business executive repeated the above meditation slowly three
times in the morning, feeling the truth of what he affirmed. When
fearful or angry thoughts came into his mind during the day, he would
say to himself, “Peace, harmony, and poise govern my mind at all
times.”
162
As he continued disciplining his mind in this manner, all the
harmful thoughts ceased to come, and peace came into his mind. He
reaped the harvest.
Subsequently, he wrote me to the effect that at the end of about two
weeks of reordering his mind, the president and the vice president
called him into the office, praised his operations and his new
constructive ideas, and remarked how fortunate they were in having
him as general manager. He was very happy in discovering that man
finds happiness within himself.
• The block or stump is not really there
I read a newspaper article some years ago, which told about a horse
that had shied when he came to a stump on the road. Subsequently,
every time the horse came to that same stump, he shied. The farmer
dug the stump out, burned it, and leveled the old road. Yet, for twentyfive years, every time the horse passed the place where the former
stump was, he shied. The horse was shying at the memory of a stump.
There is no block to your happiness save in your own thought life
and mental imagery. Is fear or worry holding you back? Fear is a
thought in your mind. You can dig it up this very moment by
supplanting it with faith in success, achievement, and victory over all
problems.
I knew a man who failed in business. He said to me, “I made
mistakes. I've learned a lot. I am going back into business, and I will
be a tremendous success.” He faced up to that stump in his mind. He
did not whine or complain, but he tore up the stump of failure, and
through believing in his inner powers to back him up, he banished all
fear thoughts and old depressions. Believe in yourself, and you will
succeed and be happy.
• The happiest people
The happiest man is he who constantly brings forth and practices
what is best in him. Happiness and virtue complement each other. The
best are not only the happiest, but the happiest are usually the best in
163
the art of living life successfully. God is the highest and best in you.
Express more of God's love, light, truth, and beauty, and you will
become one of the happiest per-sons in the world today.
Epictetus, the Greek stoic philosopher, said, “There is but one way
to tranquility of mind and happiness; let this, therefore, be always
ready at hand with thee, both when thou wakest early in the morning,
and all the day long, and when thou goest late to sleep, to account no
external things thine own, but commit all these to God.”
• Summary of steps to happiness
1. William James said that the greatest discovery of the 19th century
was the power of the subconscious mind touched by faith.
2. There is tremendous power within you. Happiness will come to
you when you acquire a sublime confidence in this power. Then, you
will make your dreams come true.
3. You can rise victorious over any defeat and realize the cherished
desires of your heart through the marvelous power of your
subconscious mind. This is the meaning of whoso-ever trusteth in the
Lord [spiritual laws of the subconscious mind], happy is he.
4. You must choose happiness. Happiness is a habit. It is a good
habit to ponder often on Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever
things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are
pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good
report; if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these
things. Phil. 4:8.
5. When you open your eyes in the morning, say to yourself, I
choose happiness today. I choose success today. I choose right action
today. I choose love and good will for all today. I choose peace today.
Pour life, love, and interest into this affirmation, and you have chosen
happiness.
6. Give thanks for all your blessings several times a day. Furthermore, pray for the peace, happiness, and prosperity of all members
of your family, your associates, and all people everywhere.
164
7. You must sincerely desire to be happy. Nothing is accom-plished
without desire. Desire is a wish with wings of imagination and faith.
Imagine the fulfillment of your de-sire, and feel its reality, and it will
come to pass. Happiness comes in answered prayer.
8. By constantly dwelling on thoughts of fear, worry, anger, hate,
and failure, you will become very depressed and un-happy.
Remember, your life is what your thoughts make of it.
9. You cannot buy happiness with all the money in the world. Some
millionaires are very happy, some are very unhappy. Many people
with very little worldly goods are very happy, and some are very
unhappy. Some married people are happy, and some very unhappy.
Some single people are happy, and some are very unhappy. The
kingdom of happiness is in your thought and feeling.
10. Happiness is the harvest of a quiet mind. Anchor your thoughts
on peace, poise, security, and divine guidance, and your mind will be
productive of happiness.
11. There is no block to your happiness. External things are not
causative; these are effects, not cause. Take your cue from the only
creative principle within you. Your thought is cause, and a new cause
produces a new effect. Choose hap-piness.
12. The happiest man is he who brings forth the highest and the best
in him. God is the highest and the best in him, for the kingdom of God
is within.
165
16
Your Subconscious Mind and
Harmonious Human Relations
In studying this book, you learn that your subconscious mind is a
recording machine, which faithfully reproduces what-ever you
impress upon it. This is one of the reasons for the application of the
Golden Rule in human relations.
MATT. 7:12 says, All things whatsoever ye would that men should
do unto you, do ye even so to them. This quotation has outer and inner
meanings. You are interested in its inner mean-ing from the standpoint
of your subconscious mind, which is: As you would that men should
think about you, think you about them in like manner. As you would
that men should feel about you, feel you also about them in like
manner. As you would want men to act toward you, act you toward
them in like manner.
For example, you may be polite and courteous to someone in your
office, but when his back is turned, you are very critical and
resentful toward him in your mind. Such negative thoughts are highly
destructive to you. It is like taking poison. You are actually taking
mental poisons, which rob you of vitality, en-thusiasm, strength,
guidance, and good will. These negative thoughts and emotions sink
down into your subconscious, and cause all kinds of difficulties and
maladies in your life.
• The master key to happy relationships with others
Judge not, that ye be not judged. For with what judg-ment ye judge,
ye shall be judged: and with what measure ye mete, it shall be
measured to you again. MATTHEW 7:1-2.
A study of these verses and the application of the inner truths
therein contained represent the real key to harmonious relations. To
judge is to think, to arrive at a mental verdict or conclusion in your
166
mind. The thought you have about the other person is your thought,
because you are thinking it.
Your thoughts are creative, therefore, you actually create in your
own experience what you think and feel about the other person. It is
also true that the suggestion you give to another, you give to yourself
because your mind is the creative medium.
This is why it is said, For with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be
judged. When you know this law and the way your subconscious mind
works, you are careful to think, feel, and act rights toward the other.
These verses teach you about the emancipation of man and reveal to
you the solution to your individual problems.
• And with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you
again
The good you do for others comes back to you in like measure; and
the evil you do returns to you by the law of your own mind. If a man
cheats and deceives another, he is actually cheating and deceiving
himself. His sense of guilt and mood of loss inevitably will attract loss
to him in some way, at some time. His subconscious records his
mental act and reacts according to the mental intention or motivation.
Your subconscious mind is impersonal and unchanging, neither
considering persons nor respecting religious affiliations or institutions
of any kind. It is neither compassionate nor vin-dictive. The way you
think, feel, and act toward others returns at last upon yourself.
• The daily headlines made him sick
Begin now to observe yourself. Observe your reactions to people,
conditions, and circumstances. How do you respond to the events and
news of the day? It makes no difference if all the other people were
wrong and you alone were right. If the news disturbs you, it is your
evil because your negative emotions robbed you of peace and
harmony.
167
A woman wrote me about her husband, saying that he goes into a
rage when he reads what certain newspaper column-ists write in the
newspaper.
She added that this constant reaction of anger and suppressed rage
on his part brought on bleeding ulcers, and his physician
recommended an emotional recon-ditioning.
I invited this man to see me and I explained to him the way his mind
functions indicating how emotionally immature it was to get angry
when others write articles with which he disapproves or disagrees.
He began to realize that he should give the newspaperman freedom
to express himself even though the latter disagreed with him
politically, religiously, or in any other way. In the same manner, the
newspaperman would give him freedom to write a letter to the
newspaper disagreeing with his published statements. He learned that
he could disagree without being disagreeable. He awakened to the
simple truth that it is never what a person says or does that affects
him, it is his reaction to what is said or done that matters.
This explanation was the cure for this man, and he real-ized that
with a little practice he could master his morning tan-trums. His wife
told me, subsequently, that he laughed at himself and also at what the
columnists say.
They no longer have power to disturb, annoy, and irritate him. His
ulcers have disappeared due to his emotional poise and serenity.
• I hate women, but I like men
A private secretary was very bitter toward some of the girls in her
office because they were gossiping about her, and as she said,
spreading vicious lies about her. She admitted that she did not like
women. She said, “I hate women, but I like men.” I discovered also
that she spoke to the girls who were under her in the office in a very
haughty, imperious, and irritable tone of voice. She pointed out that
they took a delight in making things difficult for her. There was a
168
certain pomposity in her way of speaking, and I could see where her
tone of voice would affect some people unpleasantly.
If all the people in the office or factory annoy you, isn’t it a
possibility that the vibration, annoyance, and turmoil may be due to
some subconscious pattern or mental projection from you? We know
that a dog will react ferociously if you hate or fear dogs. Animals pick
up your subconscious vibrations and react accordingly. Many
undisciplined human beings are just as sensitive as dogs, cats, and
other animals.
I suggested a process of prayer to this private secretary who hated
women, explaining to her that when she began to identify herself with
spiritual values and commenced to affirm the truths of life, her voice,
mannerisms, and hatred of women would com-pletely disappear. She
was surprised to know that the emotion of hatred shows up in a
person’s speech, actions, in his writings, and in all phases of his life.
She ceased reacting in the typical, resentful, and angry way. She
established a pattern of prayer, which she practiced regularly,
systematically, and conscien-tiously in the office.
The prayer was as follows: “I think, speak, and act lov-ingly,
quietly, and peacefully. I now radiate love, peace, toler-ance, and
kindliness to all the girls who criticized me and gos-siped about me. I
anchor my thoughts on peace, harmony, and good will to all.
Whenever I am about to react negatively, I say firmly to myself, ‘I am
going to think, speak, and act from the standpoint of the principle of
harmony, health, and peace within myself.’
Creative intelligence leads, rules, and guides me in all my ways.”
The practice of this prayer transformed her life, and she found that
all criticism and annoyance ceased. The girls became co-workers and
friends along life’s journey. She discovered that there is no one to
change but myself.
169
• His inner speech held back his promotion
One day a salesman came to see me and described his diffi-culties in
working with the sales manager of his organization. He had been with
the company ten years and had received no promotion or recognition
of any kind. He showed me his sales figures, which were greater
proportionately than the other men in the territory. He said that the
sales manager did not like him, that he was unjustly treated, and that
at conferences the man-ager was rude to him, and at times ridiculed
his suggestions.
I explained that undoubtedly the cause was to a great de-gree within
himself, and that his concept and belief about his superior bore
witness to the reaction of this man. The measure we mete, shall be
measured to us again. His mental measure or concept of the sales
manager was that he was mean and can-tankerous. He was filled with
bitterness and hostility toward the executive. On his way to work he
conducted a vigorous con-versation with himself filled with criticism,
mental arguments, recriminations, and denunciations of his sales
manager.
What he gave out mentally, he was inevitably bound to get back.
This salesman realized that his inner speech was highly destructive
because the intensity and force of his silent thoughts and emotions,
and personally conducted mental condemnation and vilification of the
sales manager entered into his own sub-conscious mind. This brought
about the negative response from his boss as well as creating many
other personal, physical, and emotional disorders.
He began to pray frequently as follows: “I am the only thinker in my
universe. I am responsible for what I think about my boss. My sales
manager is not responsible for the way I think about him. I refuse to
give power to any person, place, or thing to annoy me or disturb me. I
wish health, success, peace of mind, and happiness for my boss. I
sincerely wish him well, and I know he is divinely guided in all his
ways.”
170
He repeated this prayer out loud slowly, quietly, and feel-ingly,
knowing that his mind is like a garden, and that whatever he plants in
the garden will come forth like seeds after their kind.
I also taught him to practice mental imagery prior to sleep in this
way: He imagined that his sales manager was congratulat-ing him on
his fine work, on his zeal and enthusiasm, and on his wonderful
response from customers. He felt the reality of all this, felt his
handshake, heard the tone of his voice, and saw him smile. He made a
real mental movie, dramatizing it to the best of his ability.
Night after night he conducted this mental movie, knowing that his
subconscious mind was the receptive plate on which his conscious
imagery would be impressed.
Gradually by a process of what may be termed mental and spiritual
osmosis, the impression was made on his subconscious mind, and the
expression automatically came forth. The sales manager subsequently
called him up to San Francisco, con-gratulated him, and gave him a
new assignment as Division Sales Manager over one hundred men
with a big increase in salary. He changed his concept and estimate of
his boss, and the latter re-sponded accordingly.
• Becoming emotionally mature
What the other person says or does cannot really annoy or irritate
you except you permit him to disturb you. The only way he can annoy
you is through your own thought. For example, if you get angry, you
have to go through four stages in your mind: You begin to think about
what he said.
You decide to get angry and generate an emotion of rage. Then, you
decide to act. Per-haps, you talk back and react in kind. You see that
the thought, emotion, reaction, and action all take place in your mind.
When you become emotionally mature, you do not respond
negatively to the criticism and resentment of others. To do so would
mean that you had descended to that state of low mental vibration and
become one with the negative atmosphere of the other. Identify
171
yourself with your aim in life, and do not permit any person, place, or
thing to deflect you from your inner sense of peace, tranquility, and
radiant health.
• The meaning of love in harmonious human relations
Sigmund Freud, the Austrian founder of psychoanalysis, said that
unless the personality has love, it sickens and dies. Love includes
understanding, good will, and respect for the divinity in the other
person. The more love and good will you emanate and exude, the
more comes back to you.
If you puncture the other fellow’s ego and wound his estimate of
himself, you cannot gain his good will. Recognize that every man
wants to be loved and appreciated, and made to feel important in the
world.
Realize that the other man is conscious of his true worth, and that,
like
yourself, he feels the dignity of being an expression of the One Life
Principle animating all men. As you do this consciously and
knowingly, you build the other person up, and he returns your love
and good will.
• He hated audiences
An actor told me that the audience booed and hissed him on his first
appearance on the stage. He added that the play was badly written and
that undoubtedly he did not play a good role. He admitted openly to
me that for months afterward he hated audiences. He called them
dopes, dummies, stupid, ignorant, gullible, etc. He quit the stage in
disgust and went to work in a drugstore for a year.
One day a friend invited him to hear a lecture in Town Hall, New
York City, on “How to Get Along With Ourselves.” This lecture
changed his life.
He went back to the stage and began to pray sincerely for the
audience and himself. He poured out love and good will every night
172
before appearing on the stage. He made it a habit to claim that the
peace of God filled the hearts of all-present, and that all present were
lifted up and inspired. During each performance he sent out love
vibrations to the audience. Today, he is a great actor, and he loves and
respects people. His good will and esteem are transmitted to others
and are felt by them.
• Handling difficult people
There are difficult people in the world who are twisted and distorted
mentally. They are mal-conditioned. Many are mental delinquents,
argumentative, un-co-operative, cantankerous, cyni-cal, and sour on
life.
They are sick psychologically. Many peo-ple have deformed and
distorted minds, probably warped during childhood. Many have
congenital deformities. You would not condemn a person who had
tuberculosis, nor should you con-demn a person who is mentally ill.
No one, for example, hates or resents a hunchback; there are many
mental hunchbacks. You should have compassion and understanding.
To understand all is to forgive all.
• Misery loves company
The hateful, frustrated, distorted, and twisted personality is out of
tune with the Infinite. He resents those who are peaceful, happy, and
joyous.
Usually he criticizes, condemns, and vilifies those who have been
very good and kind to him. His attitude is this: Why should they be so
happy when he is so miserable? He wants to drag them down to his
own level. Misery loves com-pany. When you understand this you
remain unmoved, calm, and dispassionate.
• The practice of empathy in human relations
A girl visited me recently stating that she hated another girl in her
office. She gave as her reason that the other girl was prettier, happier,
and wealthier than she, and, in addition, was engaged to the boss of
the company where they worked. One day after the marriage had
173
taken place, the crippled daughter (by a former marriage) of the
woman whom she hated came into the office. The child put her arms
around her mother and said, “Mommy, mommy, I love my new
daddy! Look what he gave me!” She showed her mother a wonderful
new toy.
She said to me, “My heart went out to that little girl, and I knew
how happy she must feel. I got a vision of how happy this woman
was. All of a sudden I felt love for her, and I went into the office and
wished her all the happiness in the world, and I meant it.”
In psychological circles today, this is called empathy, which simply
means the imaginative projection of your mental attitude into that of
another.
She projected her mental mood or the feel-ing of her heart into that
of the other woman, and began to think and look out through the other
woman’s brain. She was actually thinking and feeling as the other
woman, and also as the child, because she likewise had projected
herself into the mind of the child. She was looking out from that
vantage point on the child’s mother.
If tempted to injure or think ill of another, project yourself mentally
into the mind of Moses and think from the standpoint of the Ten
Commandments. If you are prone to be envious, jealous, or angry,
project yourself into the mind of Jesus and think from that standpoint,
and you will feel the truth of the words Love ye one another.
• Appeasement never wins
Do not permit people to take advantage of you and gain their point
by temper tantrums, crying jags, or so-called heart attacks. These
people are dictators who try to enslave you and make you do their
bidding. Be firm but kind, and refuse to yield. Appeasement never
wins. Refuse to contribute to their delin-quency, selfishness, and
possessiveness. Remember, do that which is right. You are here to
fulfill your ideal and remain true to the eternal verities and spiritual
values of life, which are eternal.
174
Give no one in all the world the power to deflect you from your
goal, your aim in life, which is to express your hidden talents to the
world, to serve humanity, and to reveal more and more of God’s
wisdom, truth, and beauty to all people in the world. Remain true to
your ideal. Know definitely and abso-lutely that whatever contributes
to your peace, happiness, and fulfillment must of necessity bless all
men who walk the earth. The harmony of the part is the harmony of
the whole, for the whole is in the part, and the part is in the whole. All
you owe the other, as Paul says, is love, and love is the fulfilling of the
law of health, happiness, and peace of mind.
• Profitable pointers in human relations
1. Your subconscious mind is a recording machine, which reproduces your habitual thinking. Think good of the other, and you are
actually thinking good about yourself.
2. A hateful or resentful thought is a mental poison. Do not think ill
of
another for to do so is to think ill of yourself. You are the only
thinker in your universe, and your thoughts are creative.
3. Your mind is a creative medium; therefore, what you think and
feel about the other, you are bringing to pass in your own experience.
This is the psychological meaning of the Golden Rule. As you would
that man should think about you, think you about them in the same
manner.
4. To cheat, rob, or defraud another brings lack, loss, and limitation
to yourself. Your subconscious mind records your inner motivations,
thoughts, and feelings. These being of a negative nature; loss,
limitation, and trouble come to you in countless ways. Actually, what
you do to the other, you are doing to yourself.
5. The good you do, the kindness proffered, the love and good will
you send forth, will all come back to you multiplied in many ways.
6. You are the only thinker in your world. You are responsi-ble for
the way you think about the other. Remember, the other person is not
175
responsible for the way you think about him. Your thoughts are
reproduced. What are you thinking now about the other fellow?
7. Become emotionally mature and permit other people to differ
from you. They have a perfect right to disagree with you, and you
have the same freedom to disagree with them. You can disagree
without being disagreeable.
8. Animals pick up your fear vibrations and snap at you. If you love
animals, they will never attack you. Many un-disciplined human
beings are just as sensitive as dogs, cats, and other animals.
9. Your inner speech, representing your silent thoughts and feelings,
is experienced in the reactions of others toward you.
10. Wish for the other what you wish for yourself. This is the key to
harmonious human relations.
11. Change your concept and estimate of your employer. Feel and
know he is practicing the Golden Rule and the Law of Love, and he
will respond accordingly.
12. The other person cannot annoy you or irritate you except you
permit him. Your thought is creative; you can bless him. If someone
calls you a skunk, you have the freedom to say to the other, “God’s
peace fills your soul.”
14. Love is the answer to getting along with others. Love is
understanding, good will, and respecting the divinity of the other.
15. You would not hate a hunchback or cripple. You would have
compassion. Have compassion and understanding for mental
hunchbacks who have been conditioned negatively. To understand all
is to forgive all.
16. Rejoice in the success, promotion, and good fortune of the other.
In doing so, you attract good fortune to yourself.
17. Never yield to emotional scenes and tantrums of others.
Appeasement never wins. Do not be a doormat. Adhere to that which
is right. Stick to your ideal, knowing that the mental outlook, which
176
gives you peace, happiness, and joy, is right, good, and true. What
blesses you, blesses all.
18. All you owe any person in the world is love, and love is wishing
for everyone what you wish for yourself—health, happiness, and all
the blessings of life.
177
17
How to Use Your Subconscious Mind
for Forgiveness
Life plays no favorites. God is Life, and this Life-Principle is
flowing through you this moment. God loves to express Him-self as
harmony, peace, beauty, joy, and abundance through you. This is
called the will of God or the tendency of Life.
If you set up resistance in your mind to the flow of Life through
you, this emotional congestion will get snarled up in your
subconscious mind and cause all kinds of negative conditions. God
has nothing to do with unhappy or chaotic conditions in the world.
Man’s negative and destructive thinking brings about all these
conditions. Therefore, it is silly to blame God for your trouble or
sickness.
Many persons habitually set up mental resistance to the flow of Life
by accusing and reproaching God for the sin, sick-ness, and suffering
of mankind. Others cast the blame on God for their pains, aches, and
loss of loved ones, personal tragedies, and accidents. They are angry
at God, and they believe He is responsible for their misery.
As long as people entertain such negative concepts about God, they
will experience the automatic negative reactions from their
subconscious minds.
Actually, such people do not know that they are punishing
themselves. They must see the truth, find release, and give up all
condemnation, resentment, and anger against anyone or any power
outside themselves. Otherwise, they cannot go forward into a healthy,
happy, or creative activity. The minute these people entertain a God of
love in their minds and hearts, and when they believe that God is their
Loving Father who watches over them, cares for them, guides them,
sustains and strengthens them, this concept and belief about God or
178
the Life-Principle will be accepted by their sub-conscious mind, and
they will find themselves blessed in count-less ways.
• Life always forgives you
Life forgives you when you cut your finger. The subcon-scious
intelligence within you sets about immediately to repair it. New cells
build bridges over the cut. Should you take some tainted food by error,
Life forgives you and causes you to regurgitate it in order to preserve
you. If you burn your hand, the Life-Principle reduces the edema and
congestion, and gives you new skin, tissue, and cells. Life holds no
grudges against you, and it is always forgiving you. Life brings you
back to health, vitality, harmony, and peace, if you co-operate by
think-ing in harmony with nature. Negative, hurtful memories, bitterness, and ill will clutter up and impede the free flow of the LifePrinciple in you.
• How he banished that feeling of guilt
I knew a man who worked every night until about one o’clock in the
morning. He paid no attention to his two boys or his wife. He was
always too busy working hard. He thought people should pat him on
the back because he was working so arduously and persistently past
midnight every night. He had a blood pressure of over two hundred
and was full of guilt.
Un-consciously, he proceeded to punish himself by hard work and
he completely ignored his children. A normal man does not do that.
He is interested in his boys and in their development. He does not shut
his wife out of his world.
I explained to him why he was working so arduously, “There is
something eating you inside, otherwise, you would not act this way.
You are punishing yourself, and you have to learn to forgive
yourself.” He did have a deep sense of guilt. It was toward a brother.
I explained to him that God was not punishing him, but that he was
punishing himself. For example, if you misuse the laws of life, you
will suffer accordingly. If you put your hand on a naked charged wire,
179
you will get burned. The forces of nature are not evil; it is your use of
them that determines whether they have a good or evil effect.
Electricity is not evil; it depends on how you use it, whether to burn
down a structure or light up a home. The only sin is ignorance of the
law, and the only pun-ishment is the automatic reaction of man’s
misuse of the law.
If you misuse the principle of chemistry, you may blow up the
office or the factory. If you strike your hand on a board, you may
cause your hand to bleed. The board is not for that purpose. Its
purpose may be to lean upon or to support your feet.
This man realized that God does not condemn or punish anyone,
and that all his suffering was due to the reaction of his subconscious
mind to his own negative and destructive think-ing. He had cheated
his brother at one time, and the brother had now passed on. Still, he
was full of remorse and guilt.
I asked him, “Would you cheat your brother now?”
He said, “No.”
“Did you feel you were justified at the time?”
His reply was, “Yes.”
“But, you would not do it now?”
He added, “No, I am helping others to know how to live.”
I added the following comment, “You have a greater reason and
understanding now. Forgiveness is to forgive your-self. Forgiveness is
getting your thoughts in line with the divine law of harmony.
Selfcondemnation is called hell (bondage and restriction); forgiveness
is called heaven (harmony and peace).”
The burden of guilt and self-condemnation was lifted from his mind,
and he had a complete healing. The doctor tested his blood pressure,
and it had become normal. The explanation was the cure.
180
• A murderer learned to forgive himself
A man who murdered his brother in Europe visited me many years
ago. He was suffering from great mental anguish and torture believing
that God must punish him. He explained that his brother had been
having an affair with his wife, and that he had shot him on the spur of
the moment. This had hap-pened about fifteen years previous to his
interview with me. In the meantime, this man had married an
American girl and had been blessed with three lovely children. He was
in a posi-tion where he helped many people, and he was a transformed
man.
My explanation to him was that physically and psycho-logically he
was not the same man who shot his brother, since scientists inform us
that every cell of our bodies changes every eleven months. Moreover,
mentally and spiritually he was a new man. He was now full of love
and good will for humanity. The “old” man who committed the crime
fifteen years before was mentally and spiritually dead. Actually, he
was condemning an innocent man!
This explanation had a profound effect upon him, and he said it was
as if a great weight had been lifted from his mind. He realized the
significance of the following truth in the Bible: Come now, let us
reason together, saith the Lord: though your sins be as scarlet, they
shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall
be as wool. ISAIAH 1:18.
• Criticism cannot hurt you without your consent
A schoolteacher told me that one of her associates criticized a
speech she had given, saying to her that she spoke too fast, she
swallowed some of her words, she couldn’t be heard, her diction was
poor, and her speech ineffective. This teacher was furious and full of
resentment toward her critic.
She admitted to me that the criticisms were just. Her first reaction
was really childish, and she agreed that the letter was really a blessing
and a marvelous corrective. She proceeded immediately to supplement
her deficiencies in her speech by enrolling in a course in public
181
speaking at City College. She wrote and thanked the writer of the note
for her interest, ex-pressing appreciation for her conclusions and
findings, which enabled the teacher to correct the matter at once.
• How to be compassionate
Suppose none of the things mentioned in the letter had been true of
the teacher. The latter would have realized that her class material had
upset the prejudices, superstitions, or narrow sectarian beliefs of the
writer of the note, and that a psychologically ill person was simply
pouring forth her resentment because a psychological boil had been
hurt.
To understand this fact is to be compassionate. The next logical step
would be to pray for the other person’s peace, har-mony, and
understanding.
You cannot be hurt when you know that you are master of your
thoughts, reactions, and emotions. Emotions follow thoughts, and you
have the power to reject all thoughts, which may disturb or upset you.
• Left at the altar
Some years ago I visited a church to perform a marriage ceremony.
The young man did not appear, and at the end of two hours, the brideto-be shed a few tears, and then said to me, “I prayed for divine
guidance. This might be the answer for He never faileth.”
That was her reaction—faith in God and all things good. She had no
bitterness in her heart because as she said, “It must not have been right
action because my prayer was for right action for both of us.”
Someone else having a similar experience would have gone into a
tantrum, have had an emotional fit, re-quired sedation, and perhaps
needed hospitalization.
Tune in with the infinite intelligence within your subcon-scious
depths, trusting the answer in the same way that you trusted your
mother when she held you in her arms. This is how you can acquire
poise and mental and emotional health.
182
• It is wrong to marry. Sex is evil and I am evil
Some time ago, I talked to a young lady aged twenty-two. She was
taught that it was a sin to dance, to play cards, to swim, and to go out
with men. She was threatened by her mother who told her she would
burn eternally in hell-fire if she disobeyed her will and her religious
teachings.
This girl wore a black dress and black stockings. She wore no rouge,
lipstick, or any form of make-up because her mother said that these
things were sinful. Her mother told her that all men were evil, and that
sex was of the devil and simply diabolic debauchery.
This girl had to learn how to forgive herself, as she was full of guilt.
To forgive means to give for. She had to give up all these false beliefs
for the truths of life and a new estimate of herself. When she went out
with young men in the office where she worked, she had a deep sense
of guilt and thought that God would punish her. Several eligible young
men proposed to her, but she said to me, “It is wrong to marry. Sex is
evil and I am evil.” This was her conscience or early conditioning
speaking.
She came to me once weekly for about ten weeks, and I taught her
the workings of the conscious and subconscious mind as set forth in
this book.
This young girl gradually came to see that she had been completely
brainwashed, mesmerized, and conditioned by an ignorant,
superstitious, bigoted, and frus-trated mother. She broke away
completely from her family and started to live a wonderful life.
At my suggestion she dressed up and had her hair at-tended to. She
took lessons in dancing from a man, and she also took driving lessons.
She learned to swim, play cards, and had a number of dates. She
began to love He. She prayed for a divine companion by claiming that
Infinite Spirit would at-tract to her a man who harmonized with her
thoroughly. Eventu-ally this came to pass. As she left my office one
evening, there was a man waiting to see me and I casually introduced
them. They are now married and harmonize with each other perfectly.
183
• Forgiveness is necessary for healing
And when ye stand praying, forgive, if ye have ought against any ...
MARK 11:25.
Forgiveness of others is essential to mental peace and radiant health.
You must forgive everyone who has ever hurt you if you want perfect
health and happiness. Forgive your-self by getting your thoughts in
harmony with divine law and order. You cannot really forgive
yourself completely until you have forgiven others first. To refuse to
forgive yourself is nothing more or less than spiritual pride or
ignorance.
In the psychosomatic field of medicine today, it is being constantly
stressed that resentment, condemnation of others, re-morse, and
hostility are behind a host of maladies ranging from arthritis to cardiac
disease. They point out that these sick people, who were hurt,
mistreated, deceived, or injured, were full of resentment and hatred for
those who hurt them. This caused inflamed and festering wounds in
their subconscious minds. There is only one remedy. They have to cut
out and discard their hurts, and the one and only sure way is by
forgiveness.
• Forgiveness is love in action
The essential ingredient in the art of forgiveness is the willingness to
forgive. If you sincerely desire to forgive the other, you are fifty-one
percent over the hurdle. I feel sure you know that to forgive the other
does not necessarily mean that you like him or want to associate with
him. You cannot be compelled to like someone, neither can a
government legislate good will, love, peace, or tolerance. It is quite
impossible to like people because someone in Washington issues an
edict to that effect. We can, however, love people without liking them.
The Bible says, Love ye one another. This, anyone can do who
really wants to do it. Love means that you wish for the other health,
happiness, peace, joy, and all the blessings of life. There is only one
prerequisite, and that is sincerity. You are not being magnanimous
when you forgive, you are really being selfish, because what you wish
184
for the other, you are actually wishing for yourself. The reason is that
you are thinking it and you are feeling it. As you think and feel, so are
you. Could anything be simpler than that?
• Technique of forgiveness
The following is a simple method, which works wonders in your life
as you practice it: Quiet your mind, relax, and let go. Think of God
and His love for you, and then affirm, “I fully and freely forgive
(mention the name of the offender); I release him mentally and
spiritually. I completely forgive everything connected with the matter
in question. I am free, and he/she is free. It is a marvelous feeling. It is
my day of general amnesty. I release anybody and everybody who has
ever hurt me, and I wish for each and everyone health, happiness,
peace, and all the blessings of life. I do this freely, joyously, and
lovingly, and whenever I think of the person or persons who hurt me, I
say, ‘I have released you, and all the blessings of life are yours.’ I am
free and you are free. It is wonderful!”
The great secret of true forgiveness is that once you have forgiven
the person, it is unnecessary to repeat the prayer. Whenever the person
comes to your mind, or the particular hurt happens to enter your mind,
wish the delinquent well, and say, “Peace be to you.” Do this as often
as the thought enters your mind. You will find that after a few days
the thought of the person or experience will return less and less often,
until it fades into nothingness.
•The acid test for forgiveness
There is an acid test for gold. There is also an acid test for
forgiveness. If I should tell you something wonderful about someone
who has wronged you, cheated you, or defrauded you, and you sizzled
at hearing the good news about this person, the roots of hatred would
still be in your subconscious mind, playing havoc with you.
Let us suppose you had a painful abscess on your jaw a year ago,
and you told me about it. I would casually ask you if you had any pain
now. You would automatically say, “Of course not, I have a memory
of it but no pain.” That is the whole story. You may have a memory of
185
the incident but no sting or hurt any more. This is the acid test, and
you must meet it psychologically and spiritually, otherwise, you are
simply deceiving yourself and not practicing the true art of
forgiveness.
• To understand all is to forgive all
When man understands the creative law of his own mind, he ceases
to blame other people and conditions for making or marring his life.
He knows that his own thoughts and feelings create his destiny.
Furthermore, he is aware that externals are not the causes and
conditioners of his life and his experiences. To think that others can
mar your happiness that you are the football of a cruel fate that you
must oppose and fight others for a living—all these and others like
them are untenable when you understand that thoughts are things. The
Bible says the same thing. For as a man thinketh in his heart, so is he.
PROV-ERBS 23:7.
• Summary of your aids to forgiveness
1. God, or Life, is no respecter of persons. Life plays no favorites.
Life, or God, seems to favor you when you align yourself with the
principle of harmony, health, joy, and peace.
2. God, or Life, never sends disease, sickness, accident, or suffering. We bring these things on ourselves by our own nega-tive
destructive thinking based upon the law as we sow, so shall we reap.
3. Your concept of God is the most important thing in your life. If
you really believe in a God of love, your subcon-scious mind will
respond in countless blessings to you. Be-lieve in a God of love.
4. Life, or God, holds no grudge against you. Life never condemns
you. Life heals a severe cut on your hand. Life forgives you if you
burn your finger. It reduces the edema and restores the part to
wholeness and perfection.
5. Your guilt complex is a false concept of God and Life. God, or
Life, does not punish or judge you. You do this to yourself by your
false beliefs, negative thinking, and self-condemnation.
186
6. God, or Life, does not condemn or punish you. The forces of
nature are not evil. The effect of their use depends on how you use the
power within you. You can use electricity to kill someone or to light
the house.
You can use water to drown a child, or quench his thirst. Good and
evil come right back to the thought and purpose in man’s own mind.
7. God, or Life, never punishes. Man punishes himself by his false
concepts of God, Life, and the Universe. His thoughts are creative,
and he creates his own misery.
8. If another criticizes you, and these faults are within you, rejoice,
give thanks, and appreciate the comments. This gives you the
opportunity to correct the particular fault.
9. You cannot be hurt by criticism when you know that you are
master of your thoughts, reactions, and emotions. This gives you the
opportunity to pray and bless the other, thereby blessing yourself.
10. When you pray for guidance and right action, take what comes.
Realize it is good and very good. Then there is no cause for self-pity,
criticism, or hatred. 11. There is nothing good or bad, but thinking
makes it so. There is no evil in sex, the desire for food, wealth, or true
expression. It depends on how you use these urges, desires, or
aspirations. Your desire for food can be met without killing someone
for a loaf of bread.
12. Resentment, hatred, ill will, and hostility are behind a host of
maladies. Forgive yourself and everybody else by pour-ing out love,
life, joy, and good will to all those who have hurt you. Continue until
such time as you meet them in your mind and you are at peace with
them.
13. To forgive is to give something for. Give love, peace, joy,
wisdom, and all the blessings of life to the other, until there is no sting
left in your mind. This is really the acid test of forgiveness.
187
14. Let us suppose you had an abscess in your jaw about a year ago.
It was very painful. Ask yourself if it is painful now. The answer is in
the negative. Likewise, if someone has hurt you, lied about and
vilified you, and said all manner of evil about you, is your thought of
that person negative? Do you sizzle when he or she comes into your
mind? If so, the roots of hatred are still there, playing havoc with you
and your good. The only way is to wither them with love by wishing
for the person all the blessings of life, until you can meet the person in
your mind, and you can sincerely react with a benediction of peace
and good will. This is the meaning of forgive until seventy times
seven.
188
18
How Your Subconscious Removes
Mental Blocks
The solution lies within the problem. The answer is in every
question. If you are presented with a difficult situation and you cannot
see your way clear, the best procedure is to assume that infinite
intelligence within your subconscious mind knows all and sees all, has
the answer, and is revealing it to you now. Your new mental attitude
that the creative intelligence is bringing about a happy solution will
enable you to find the answer. Rest assured that such an attitude of
mind would bring order, peace, and meaning to all your undertakings.
• How to break or build a habit
You are a creature of habit. Habit is the function of your
subconscious mind. You learned to swim, ride a bicycle, dance, and
drive a car by consciously doing these things over and over again until
they established tracks in your subconscious mind. Then, the
automatic habit action of your subconscious mind took over. This is
sometimes called second nature, which is a reaction of your
subconscious mind to your thinking and acting.
You are free to choose a good habit or a bad habit. If you repeat a
negative thought or act over a period of time, you will be under the
compulsion of a habit. The law of your sub-conscious is compulsion.
• How he broke a bad habit
Mr. Jones said to me, “An uncontrollable urge to drink seizes me,
and I remain drunk for two weeks at a time. I can’t give up this
terrible habit.”
Time and time again these experiences had occurred to this
unfortunate man. He had grown into the habit of drinking to excess.
Although he had started drinking of his own initiative, he also began
to realize that he could change the habit and establish a new one. He
189
said that while through his will power he was able to suppress his
desires temporarily, his continued efforts to suppress the many urges
only made matters worse. His repeated failures convinced him that he
was hopeless and powerless to control his urge or obsession. This idea
of being powerless operated as a powerful suggestion to his
subconscious mind and aggravated his weakness, making his life a
succession of failures.
I taught him to harmonize the functions of the conscious and
subconscious mind. When these two cooperate, the idea or desire
implanted in the subconscious mind is realized. His reason-ing mind
agreed that if the old habit path or track had carried him into trouble,
he could consciously form a new path to freedom, sobriety, and peace
of mind. He knew that his de-structive habit was automatic, but since
it was acquired through his conscious choice, he realized that if he had
been conditioned negatively, he also could be conditioned positively.
As a result, he ceased thinking of the fact that he was powerless to
overcome the habit. Moreover, he understood clearly that there was no
obstacle to his healing other than his own thought.
Therefore, there was no occasion for great mental effort or mental
coercion.
• The power of his mental picture
This man acquired a practice of relaxing his body and getting into a
relaxed, drowsy, meditative state. Then he filled his mind with the
picture of the desired end, knowing his sub-conscious mind could
bring it about the easiest way. He imagined his daughter
congratulating him on his freedom, and saying to him, “Daddy, it’s
wonderful to have you home!” He had lost his family through drink.
He was not allowed to visit them, and his wife would not speak to
him.
Regularly, systematically, he used to sit down and meditate in the
way outlined. When his attention wandered, he made it a habit to
immediately recall the mental picture of his daughter with her smile
and the scene of his home enlivened by her cheerful voice. All this
190
brought about a reconditioning of his mind. It was a gradual process.
He kept it up. He persevered knowing that sooner or later he would
establish a new habit pattern in his subconscious mind.
I told him that he could liken his conscious mind to a camera, that
his subconscious mind was the sensitive plate on which he registered
and impressed the picture. This made a pro-found impression on him,
and his whole aim was to firmly impress the picture on his mind and
develop it there. Films are developed in the dark; likewise, mental
pictures are developed in the darkroom of the subconscious mind.
• Focused attention
Realizing that his conscious mind was simply a camera, he used no
effort. There was no mental struggle. He quietly ad-justed his thoughts
and focused his attention on the scene before him until he gradually
became identified with the picture. He became absorbed in the mental
atmosphere, repeating the mental movie frequently. There was no
room for doubt that a healing would follow. When there was any
temptation to drink, he would switch his imagination from any
reveries of drinking bouts to the feeling of being at home with his
family. He was successful because he confidently expected to
experience the picture he was developing in his mind. Today he is
president of a multimillion-dollar concern and is radiantly happy.
• He said a jinx was following him
Mr. Block said that he had been making an annual income of
$20,000, but for the past three months all doors seemed to jam tightly.
He brought clients up to the point where they were about to sign on
the dotted line, and then at the eleventh hour the door closed. He
added that perhaps a jinx was following him.
In discussing the matter with Mr. Block, I discovered that three
months previously he had become very irritated, annoyed, and
resentful toward a dentist who, after he had promised to sign a
contract, had withdrawn at the last moment. He began to live in the
unconscious fear that other clients would do the same, thereby setting
up a history of frustration, hostility, and obstacles. He gradually built
191
up in his mind a belief in obstruc-tion and last minute cancellations
until a vicious circle had been established. What I fear most has come
upon me. Mr. Block realized that the trouble was in his mind, and that
it was essential to change his mental attitude.
His run of so-called misfortune was broken in the follow-ing way:
“I realize I am one with the infinite intelligence of my subconscious
mind which knows no obstacle, difficulty, or delay. I live in the
joyous expectancy of the best. My deeper mind responds to my
thoughts. I know that the work of the infinite power of my
subconscious cannot be hindered. Infinite intelligence always finishes
successfully whatever it begins. Creative wisdom works through me
bringing all my plans and purposes to completion. Whatever I start, I
bring to a success-ful conclusion. My aim in life is to give wonderful
service, and all those whom I contact are blessed by what I have to
offer. All my work comes to full fruition in divine order.”
He repeated this prayer every morning before going to call on his
customers, and he also prayed each night prior to sleep. In a short time
he had established a new habit pattern in his subconscious mind, and
he was back in his old accustomed stride as a successful salesman.
• How much do you want what you want?
A young man asked Socrates how he could get wisdom. Socrates
replied, “Come with me.” He took the lad to a river, pushed the boy’s
head under the water, held it there until the boy was gasping for air,
then relaxed and released his head. When the boy regained his
composure, he asked him, “What did you desire most when you were
under water?”
“I wanted air,” said the boy.
Socrates said to him, “When you want wisdom as much as you
wanted air when you were immersed in the water, you will receive it.”
Likewise, when you really have an intense desire to over-come any
block in your life, and you come to a clear-cut de-cision that there is a
192
way out, and that is the course you wish to follow, then victory and
triumph are assured.
If you really want peace of mind and inner calm, you will get it.
Regardless of how unjustly you have been treated, or how unfair the
boss has been, or what a mean scoundrel some-one has proved to be,
all this makes no difference to you when you awaken to your mental
and spiritual powers. You know what you want, and you will
definitely refuse to let the thieves (thoughts) of hatred, anger, hostility,
and ill will rob you of peace, harmony, health, and happiness. You
cease to become upset by people, conditions, news, and events by
identifying your thoughts immediately with your aim in life. Your aim
is peace, health, inspiration, harmony, and abundance. Feel a river of
peace flowing through you now. Your thought is the immaterial and
invisible power, and you choose to let it bless, inspire, and give you
peace.
• Why he could not be healed
This is a case history of a married man with four children who was
supporting and secretly living with another woman during his business
trips.
He was ill, nervous, irritable, and cantankerous, and he could not
sleep without drugs. The doctor’s medicine failed to bring down his
high blood pressure of over two hundred. He had pains in numerous
organs of his body, which doctors could not diagnose or relieve. To
make matters worse, he was drinking heavily.
The cause of all this was a deep unconscious sense of guilt. He had
violated the marriage vows, and this troubled him. The religious creed
he was brought up on was deeply lodged in his subconscious mind,
and he drank excessively to heal the wound of guilt. Some invalids
take morphine and codeine for severe pains; he was taking alcohol for
the pain or wound in his mind. It was the old story of adding fuel to
the fire.
193
• The explanation and the cure
He listened to the explanation of how his mind worked. He faced his
problem, looked at it, and gave up his dual role. He knew that his
drinking was an unconscious attempt to escape. The hidden cause
lodged in his subconscious mind had to be eradicated; then the healing
would follow.
He began to impress his subconscious mind three or four times a
day by using the following prayer: “My mind is full of peace, poise,
balance, and equilibrium. The infinite lies stretched in smiling repose
within me. I am not afraid of anything in the past, the present, or the
future. The infinite intelligence of my subconscious mind leads,
guides, and directs me in all ways. I now meet every situation with
faith, poise, calmness, and confidence.
I am now completely free from the habit. My mind is full of inner
peace, freedom, and joy. I forgive myself; then I am forgiven. Peace,
sobriety, and confidence reign supreme in my mind.”
He repeated this prayer frequently as outlined; being fully aware of
what he was doing and why he was doing it. Knowing what he was
doing gave him the necessary faith and confidence. I explained to him
that as he spoke these statements out loud, slowly, lovingly, and
meaningfully, they would gradually sink down into his subconscious
mind. Like seeds, they would grow after their kind. These truths, on
which he concentrated, went in through his eyes, his ears heard the
sound, and the healing vibrations of these words reached his
subconscious mind and obliterated all the negative mental patterns
which caused all the trouble. Light dispels darkness. The constructive
thought de-stroys the negative thought. He became a transformed man
within a month.
• Refusing to admit it
If you are an alcoholic or drug addict, admit it. Do not dodge the
issue. Many people remain alcoholics because they refuse to admit it.
194
Your disease is instability, an inner fear. You are refusing to face
life, and so you try to escape your responsi-bilities through the bottle.
As an alcoholic you have no free will, although you think you have,
and you may even boast about your will power. If you are a habitual
drunkard and say bravely, “I will not touch it any more,” you have no
power to make this assertion come true, because you do not know
where to locate the power.
You are living in a psychological prison of your own making, and
you are bound by your beliefs, opinions, training, and environmental
influences.
Like most people, you are a creature of habit. You are conditioned
to react the way you do.
• Building in the idea of freedom
You can build the idea of freedom and peace of mind into your
mentality so that it reaches your subconscious depths. The latter, being
allpowerful, will free you from all desire for alcohol. Then, you will
have the new understanding of how your mind works, and you can
truly back up your statement and prove the truth to yourself.
• Fifty-one percent healed
If you have a keen desire to free yourself from any de-structive
habit, you are fifty-one percent healed already. When you have a
greater desire to give up the bad habit than to con-tinue it, you will not
experience too much difficulty in gaining complete freedom.
Whatever thought you anchor the mind upon, the latter magnifies. If
you engage the mind on the concept of freedom (freedom from the
habit) and peace of mind, and if you keep it focused on this new
direction of attention, you generate feelings and emotions, which
gradually emotionalize the concept of freedom and peace. Whatever
idea you emotionalize is accepted by your subconscious and brought
to pass.
195
• The law of substitution
Realize that something good can come out of your suffer-ing. You
have not suffered in vain. However, it is foolish to continue to suffer.
If you continue as an alcoholic, it will bring about mental and
physical deterioration and decay. Realize that the power in your
subconscious is backing you up. Even though you may be seized with
melancholia, you should begin to imagine the joy of freedom that is in
store for you. This is the law of substi-tution. Your imagination took
you to the bottle; let it take you now to freedom and peace of mind.
You will suffer a little bit, but it is for a constructive purpose. You
will bear it like a mother in the pangs of childbirth, and you will,
likewise, bring forth a child of the mind. Your subconscious will give
birth to sobriety.
• Cause of alcoholism
The real cause of alcoholism is negative and destructive thinking;
for as a man thinketh, so is he. The alcoholic has a deep sense of
inferiority, inadequacy, defeat, and frustration, usually accompanied
by a deep inner hostility. He has countless alibis as to his reason for
drinking, but the sole reason is in his thought life.
• Three magic steps
The first step: Get still; quiet the wheels of the mind. Enter into a
sleepy, drowsy state. In this relaxed, peaceful, receptive state, you are
preparing for the second step.
The second step: Take a brief phrase, which can readily be graven
on the memory, and repeat it over and over as a lullaby. Use the
phrase, “Sobriety and peace of mind are mine now, and I give thanks.”
To prevent the mind from wandering, repeat it aloud or sketch its
pronunciation with the lips and tongue as you say it mentally. This
helps its entry into the subconscious mind. Do this for five minutes or
more. You will find a deep emotional response.
The third step: Just before going to sleep, practice what Johann von
Goethe, German author, used to do. Imagine a friend, a loved one in
196
front of you. Your eyes are closed, you are relaxed and at peace. The
loved one or friend is subjectively present, and is saying to you,
“Congratulations!” You see the smile; you hear the voice. You
mentally touch the hand; it is all real and vivid. The word
congratulations imply complete freedom. Hear it over and over again
until you get the sub-conscious reaction, which satisfies.
• Keep on keeping on
When fear knocks at the door of your mind, or when worry, anxiety,
and doubt cross your mind, behold your vision, your goal. Think of
the infinite power within your subconscious mind, which you can
generate by your thinking and imagining, and this will give you
confidence, power, and courage. Keep on, persevere, until the day
breaks, and the shadows flee away.
• Review your thought power
1. The solution lies within the problem. The answer is in every
question. Infinite intelligence responds to you as you call upon it with
faith and confidence.
2. Habit is the function of your subconscious mind. There is no
greater evidence of the marvelous power of your sub-conscious than
the force and sway habit holds in your life. You are a creature of habit.
3. You form habit patterns in your subconscious mind by repeating
a thought and act over and over again until it establishes tracks in the
subconscious mind and becomes automatic, such as swimming,
dancing, typing, walking, driving your car, etc.
4. You have freedom to choose. You can choose a good habit or a
bad habit. Prayer is a good habit.
5. Whatever mental picture, backed by faith, you behold in your
conscious mind, and your subconscious mind will bring to pass.
6. The only obstacle to your success and achievement is your own
thought or mental image.
197
7. When your attention wanders, bring it back to the con-templation
of your good or goal. Make a habit of this. This is called disciplining
the mind.
8. Your conscious mind is the camera, and your subconscious mind
is the sensitive plate on which you register or impress the picture.
9. The only jinx that follows anyone is a fear thought re-peated over
and over in the mind. Break the jinx by know-ing that whatever you
start you will bring to a conclusion in divine order. Picture the happy
ending and sustain it with confidence.
10. To form a new habit, you must be convinced that it is desirable.
When your desire to give up the bad habit is greater than your desire
to continue, you are fifty-one per-cent healed already.
11. The statements of others cannot hurt you except through your
own thoughts and mental participation. Identify your-self with your
aim, which is peace, harmony, and joy. You are the only thinker in
your universe.
12. Excessive drinking is an unconscious desire to escape. The
cause of alcoholism is negative and destructive thinking. The cure is
to think of freedom, sobriety, and perfection, and to feel the thrill of
accomplishment.
13. Many people remain alcoholics because they refuse to admit it.
14. The law of your subconscious mind, which held you in bondage
and inhibited your freedom of action, will give you freedom and
happiness. It depends on how you use it.
15. Your imagination took you to the bottle; let it take you to
freedom by imagining you are free.
16. The real cause of alcoholism is negative and destructive
thinking. As a man thinketh in his heart [subconscious mind], so is he.
17. When fear knocks at the door of your mind, let faith in God and
all things good open the door.
198
19
How to Use Your Subconscious Mind to
Remove Fear
One of our students told me that he was invited to speak at a
banquet. He said he was panic-stricken at the thought of speaking
before a thousand people. He overcame his fear this way: For several
nights he sat down in an armchair for about five minutes and said to
himself slowly, quietly, and positively, “I am going to master this fear.
I am overcoming it now. I speak with poise and confidence. I am
relaxed and at ease.” He operated a definite law of mind and overcame
his fear.
The subconscious mind is amenable to suggestion and is controlled
by suggestion. When you still your mind and relax, the thoughts of
your conscious mind sink down into the sub-conscious through a
process similar to osmosis, whereby fluids separated by a porous
membrane intermingle. As these positive seeds, or thoughts, sink into
the subconscious area, they grow after their kind, and you become
poised, serene, and calm.
• Man’s greatest enemy
It is said that fear is man’s greatest enemy. Fear is behind failure,
sickness, and poor human relations. Millions of people are afraid of
the past, the future, old age, insanity, and death. Fear is a thought in
your mind, and you are afraid of your own thoughts.
A little boy can be paralyzed with fear when he is told there is a
boogieman under his bed that is going to take him away. When his
father turns on the light and shows him there is no boogieman, he is
freed from fear. The fear in the mind of the boy was as real as if there
really was a boogie man there. He was healed of a false thought in his
mind. The thing he feared did not exist. Likewise, most of your fears
have no reality. They are merely a conglomeration of sinister shadows
and shadows have no reality.
199
• Do the thing you fear
Ralph Waldo Emerson, philosopher and poet, said, “Do the thing
you are afraid to do, and the death of fear is certain.”
There was a time when the writer of this chapter was filled with
unutterable fear when standing before an audience. The way I
overcame it was to stand before the audience, do the thing I was afraid
to do, and the death of fear was certain.
When you affirm positively that you are going to master your fears,
and you come to a definite decision in your conscious mind, you
release the power of the subconscious, which flows in response to the
nature of your thought.
• Banishing stage fright
A young lady was invited to an audition. She had been looking
forward to the interview. However, on three previous occasions, she
had failed miserably due to stage fright.
She possessed a very good voice, but she was certain that when the
time came for her to sing, she would be seized with stage fright. The
subconscious mind takes your fears as a re-quest, proceeds to manifest
them, and brings them into your experience. On three previous
auditions she sang wrong notes, and she finally broke down and cried.
The cause, as previously outlined, was an involuntary autosuggestion,
i.e., a silent fear thought emotionalized and subjectified.
She overcame it by the following technique: Three times a day she
isolated herself in a room. She sat down comfortably in an armchair,
relaxed her body, and closed her eyes. She stilled her mind and body
to the best of her ability. Physical inertia favors passivity and renders
the mind more receptive to sug-gestion. She counteracted the fear
suggestion by its converse, saying to herself, “I sing beautifully. I am
poised, serene, con-fident, and calm.”
She repeated the words slowly, quietly, and with feeling from five to
ten times at each sitting. She had three such “sittings” every day and
one immediately prior to sleep at night. At the end of a week she was
200
completely poised and confident, and gave a definitely outstanding
audition. Carry out the above procedure, and the death of fear is
certain.
• Fear of failure
Occasionally young men from the local university come to see me,
as well as schoolteachers, who often seem to suffer from suggestive
amnesia at examinations. The complaint is always the same: “I know
the answers after the examination is over, but I can’t remember the
answers during the examination.”
The idea, which realizes itself, is the one to which we in-variably
give concentrated attention. I find that each one is obsessed with the
idea of failure. Fear is behind the temporary amnesia, and it is the
cause of the whole experience.
One young medical student was the most brilliant person in his
class, yet he found himself failing to answer simple ques-tions at the
time of written or oral examinations. I explained to him that the reason
was he had been worrying and was fear-ful for several days previous
to the examination. These negative thoughts became charged with
fear.
Thoughts enveloped in the powerful emotion of fear are realized in
the subconscious mind. In other words, this young man was requesting
his subconscious mind to see to it that he failed, and that is exactly
what it did.
On the day of the examina-tion he found himself stricken with what
is called, in psycho-logical circles, suggestive amnesia.
• How he overcame the fear
He learned that his subconscious mind was the storehouse of
memory, and that it had a perfect record of all he had heard and read
during his medical training. Moreover, he learned that the
subconscious mind was responsive and reciprocal. The way to be en
rapport with it was to be relaxed, peaceful, and confident. Every night
and morning he began to imagine his mother congratulating him on
201
his wonderful record. He would hold an imaginary letter from her in
his hand. As he began to contem-plate the happy result, he called forth
a corresponding or re-ciprocal response or reaction in himself. The allwise and omnipotent power of the subconscious took over, dictated,
and directed his conscious mind accordingly. He imagined the end,
thereby willing the means to the realization of the end. Follow-ing this
procedure, he had no trouble passing subsequent exami-nations. In
other words, the subjective wisdom took over, compelling him to give
an excellent account of himself.
• Fear of water, mountains, closed places, etc.
There are many people who are afraid to go into an ele-vator, climb
mountains, or even swim in the water. It may well be that the
individual had unpleasant experiences in the water in his youth, such
as having been thrown forcibly into the water without being able to
swim. He might have been forcibly detained in an elevator, which
failed to function properly, causing resultant fear of closed places.
I had an experience when I was about ten years of age. I
accidentally fell into a pool and went down three times. I can still
remember the dark water engulfing my head, and my gasping for air
until another boy pulled me out at the last moment. This experience
sank into my subconscious mind, and for years I feared the water.
An elderly psychologist said to me, “Go down to the swimming
pool, look at the water, and say out loud in strong tones, ‘I am going
to master you. I can dominate you.’ Then go into the water, take
lessons, and overcome it.” This I did, and I mastered the water. Do not
permit water to master you. Remember, you are the master of the
water.
When I assumed a new attitude of mind, the omnipotent power of
the subconscious responded, giving me strength, faith, and confidence,
and enabling me to overcome my fear.
202
• Master technique for overcoming any particular fear
The following is a process and technique for overcoming fear,
which I teach from the platform. It works like a charm. Try it!
Suppose you are afraid of the water, a mountain, an inter-view, an
audition, or you fear closed places. If you are afraid of swimming,
begin now to sit still for five or ten minutes three or four times a day,
and imagine you are swimming. Actually, you are swimming in your
mind. It is a subjective experience. Mentally you have projected
yourself into the water.
You feel the chill of the water and the movement of your arms and
legs. It is all real, vivid, and a joyous activity of the mind. It is not idle
daydreaming, for you know that what you are experiencing in your
imagination will be developed in your subconscious mind. Then you
will be compelled to express the image and likeness of the picture you
impressed on your deeper mind. This is the law of the subconscious.
You could apply the same technique if you are afraid of mountains
or high places. Imagine you are climbing the moun-tain, feel the
reality of it all, enjoy the scenery, knowing that as you continue to do
this mentally, you will do it physically with ease and comfort.
•He blessed the elevator
I knew an executive of a large corporation who was terri-fied to ride
in an elevator. He would walk up five flights of stairs to his office
every morning. He said that he began to bless the elevator every night
and several times a day. He finally overcame his fear. This was how
he blessed the elevator: “The elevator in our building is a wonderful
idea. It came out of the universal mind. It is a boon and a blessing to
all our employees. It gives wonderful service. It operates in divine
order. I ride in it in peace and joy. I remain silent now while the
currents of life, love, and understanding flow through the patterns of
my thought. In my imagination I am now in the elevator, and I step
out into my office. The elevator is full of our employees. I talk to
them, and they are friendly, joyous, and free. It is a wonderful experience of freedom, faith, and confidence. I give thanks.”
203
He continued this prayer for about ten days, and on the eleventh
day, he walked into the elevator with other members of the
organization and felt completely free.
• Normal and abnormal fear
Man is born only with two fears, the fear of falling and the fear of
noise. These are an alarm system given you by nature as a means of
selfpreservation. Normal fear is good. You hear an automobile coming
down the road, and you step aside to survive. The momentary fear of
being run over is overcome by your action. All other fears were given
to you by parents, relatives, teachers, and all those who influenced
your early years.
• Abnormal fear
Abnormal fear takes place when man lets his imagination run riot. I
knew a woman who was invited to go on a trip around the world by
plane.
She began to cut out of the newspapers all reports of airplane
catastrophes. She pictured herself going down in the ocean, being
drowned, etc. This is abnormal fear. Had she persisted in this, she
would undoubtedly have attracted what she feared most.
Another example of abnormal fear is that of a business-man in New
York, who was very prosperous and successful. He had his own
private mental motion picture of which he was the director. He would
run this mental movie of failure, bank-ruptcy, empty shelves, and no
bank balance until he sank into a deep depression. He refused to stop
this morbid imagery and kept reminding his wife that “this can’t last,”
“there will be a recession,”
“I feel sure we will go bankrupt,” etc.
His wife told me that he finally did go into bankruptcy, and all the
things he imagined and feared came to pass. The things he feared did
not exist, but he brought them to pass by constantly fearing, believing,
and expecting financial disaster. Job said, the thing I feared has come
upon me.
204
There are people who are afraid that something terrible will happen
to their children, and that some dread catastrophe will befall them.
When they read about an epidemic or rare disease, they live in fear
that they will catch it, and some imagine they have the disease
already. All this is abnormal fear.
• The answer to abnormal fear
Move mentally to the opposite. To stay at the extreme of fear is
stagnation plus mental and physical deterioration. When fear arises,
there immediately comes with it a desire for some-thing opposite to
the thing feared. Place your attention on the thing immediately
desired. Get absorbed and engrossed in your desire, knowing that the
subjective always overturns the ob-jective. This attitude will give you
confidence and lift your spirits.
The infinite power of your subconscious mind is moving on your
behalf, and it cannot fail. Therefore, peace and assur-ance are yours.
• Examine your fears
The president of a large organization told me that when he was a
salesman he used to walk around the block five or six times before he
called on a customer. The sales manager came along one day and said
to him “Don’t be afraid of the boogie man behind the door. There is
no boogieman. It is a false belief.”
The manager told him that whenever he looked at his own fears he
stared them in the face and stood up to them, looking them straight in
the eye. Then they faded and shrank into in-significance.
• He landed in the jungle
A chaplain told me of his experiences in the Second World War. He
had to parachute from a damaged plane and land in the jungle. He said
he was frightened, but he knew there were two kinds of fear, normal
and abnormal, which we have previously pointed out.
205
He decided to do something about the fear immediately. and began
to talk to himself saying, “John, you can’t surrender to your fear. Your
fear is a desire for safety and security, and a way out.”
He began to claim; “Infinite intelligence which guides the planets in
their courses is now leading and guiding me out of this jungle.”
He kept saying this out loud to himself for ten minutes or more.
“Then,” he added, “Something began to stir inside me. A mood of
confidence began to seize me, and I began to walk. After a few days, I
miraculously came out of the jungle, and was picked up by a rescue
plane.”
His changed mental attitude saved him. His confidence and trust hi
the subjective wisdom and power within him was the solution to his
problem.
He said, “Had I begun to bemoan my fate and indulge my fears, I
would have succumbed to the monster fear, and probably would have
died of fear and starvation.”
• He dismissed himself
The general manager of an organization told me that for three years
he feared he would lose his position. He was always imagining failure.
The thing he feared did not exist, save as a morbid anxious thought in
his own mind. His vivid imagination dramatized the loss of his job
until he became nervous and neu-rotic. Finally he was asked to resign.
Actually, he dismissed himself. His constant negative im-agery and
fear suggestions to his subconscious mind caused the latter to respond
and react accordingly. It caused him to make mistakes and foolish
decisions, which resulted in his failure as a general manager. His
dismissal would never have happened,. if he had immediately moved
to the opposite in his mind.
• They plotted against him
During a recent world lecture tour, I had a two-hour conversation
with a prominent government official. He had a deep sense of inner
206
peace and serenity. He said that all the abuse he receives politically
from newspapers and the opposition party never disturb him. His
practice is to sit still for fifteen minutes in the morning and realize that
in the center of him is a deep still ocean of peace. Meditating in this
way, he generates tremendous power, which overcomes all manner of
difficulties and fears.
Some time previously, a colleague called him at midnight and told
him a group of people was plotting against him. This is what he said
to his colleague, “I am going to sleep now in perfect peace. You can
discuss it with me at 10:00 A.M. to-morrow.”
He said to me, “I know that no negative thought can ever manifest
except I emotionalize the thought and accept it men-tally. I refuse to
entertain their suggestion of fear. Therefore, no harm can come to
me.”
Notice how calm he was, how cool, how peaceful! He did not start
getting excited, tearing his hair, or wringing his hands. At his center
he found the still water, an inner peace, and there was a great calm.
• Deliver yourself from all your fears
Use this perfect formula for casting out fear. I sought the Lord, and
He heard me, and delivered me from all my fears. PSALM 34:4. The
Lord is an ancient word meaning law—the power of your
subconscious mind.
Learn the wonders of your subconscious, and how it works and
functions. Master the techniques given to you in this chapter. Put them
into practice now, today! Your subconscious will re-spond, and you
will be free of all fears. I sought the Lord, and He heard me, and
delivered me from all my fears.
• Step this way to freedom from fear
1. Do the thing you are afraid to do, and the death of fear is certain.
Say to yourself and mean it, “I am going to master this fear,” and you
will.
207
2. Fear is a negative thought in your mind. Supplant it with a
constructive thought. Fear has killed millions. Confidence is greater
than fear. Nothing is more powerful than faith in God and the good.
3. Fear is man’s greatest enemy. It is behind failure, sickness, and
bad human relations. Love casts out fear. Love is an emotional
attachment to the good things of life. Fall in love with honesty,
integrity, justice, good will, and success. Live in the joyous
expectancy of the best, and invariably the best will come to you.
4. Counteract the fear suggestions with the opposite, such as “I sing
beautifully; I am poised, serene, and calm.” It will pay fabulous
dividends.
5. Fear is behind amnesia at oral and written examination time. You
can overcome this by affirming frequently, “I have a perfect memory
for everything I need to know,” or you can imagine a friend
congratulating you on your bril-liant success on the examination.
Persevere and you will win.
6. If you are afraid to cross water, swim. In your imagina-tion swim
freely, joyously. Project yourself into the water mentally. Feel the
chill and thrill of swimming across the pool. Make it vivid. As you do
this subjectively, you will be compelled to go into the water and
conquer it. This is the law of your mind.
7. If you are afraid of closed places, such as elevators, lecture halls,
etc., mentally ride in an elevator blessing all its parts and functions.
You will be amazed how quickly the fear will be dissipated.
8. You were born with only two fears, the fear of falling and the fear
of noise. All your other fears were acquired. Get rid of them.
9. Normal fear is good. Abnormal fear is very bad and de-structive.
To constantly indulge in fear thoughts results in abnormal fear,
obsessions, and complexes. To fear some-thing persistently causes a
sense of panic and terror.
10. You can overcome abnormal fear when you know the power of
your subconscious mind can change conditions and bring to pass the
208
cherished desires of your heart. Give your immediate attention and
devotion to your desire which is the opposite of your fear. This is the
love that casts out fear.
11. If you are afraid of failure, give attention to success. If you are
afraid of sickness, dwell on your perfect health. If you are afraid of an
accident, dwell on the guidance and protection of God. If you are
afraid of death, dwell on Eternal Life. God is Life, and that is your life
now.
12. The great law of substitution is the answer to fear. What-ever
you fear has its solution in the form of your desire. If you are sick, you
desire health. If you are in the prison of fear, you desire freedom.
Expect the good. Mentally con-centrate on the good, and know that
your subconscious mind answers you always. It never fails.
13. The things you fear do not really exist except as thoughts in your
mind. Thoughts are creative. This is why Job said; the thing I feared
has come upon me. Think good and good follows.
14. Look at your fears; hold them up to the light of reason. Learn to
laugh at your fears. That is the best medicine.
15. Nothing can disturb you but your own thought. The suggestions, statements, or threats of other persons have no power. The
power is within you, and when your thoughts are focused on that
which is good, then God’s power is with your thoughts of good. There
is only one Creative Power, and It moves as harmony. There are no
divisions of quarrels in it. Its source is Love. This is why God’s
power is with your thoughts of good.
209
20
How to Stay Young in Spirit Forever
Your subconscious mind never grows old. It is timeless, ageless,
and endless. It is a part of the universal mind of God, which was never
born, and it will never die.
Fatigue or old age cannot be predicated on any spiritual quality or
power. Patience, kindness, veracity, humility, good will, peace,
harmony, and brotherly love are attributes and qualities, which never
grow old. If you continue to generate these qualities here on this plane
of life, you will always remain young in spirit.
I remember reading an article in one of our magazines some years
ago, which stated that a group of eminent medical men at the De
Courcy Clinic, in Cincinnati, Ohio, reported that years alone are not
responsible for bringing about degenerative disorders. These same
physicians stated that it is the fear of time, not time itself, that has a
harmful aging effect on our minds and bodies, and that the neurotic
fear of the effects of time may well be the cause of premature aging.
During the many years of my public life, I have had oc-casion to
study the biographies of the famous men and women who have
continued their productive activities into the years well beyond the
normal span of life.
Some of them achieve their greatness in old age. At the same time,
it has been my privilege to meet and to know countless individuals of
no prominence who, in their lesser sphere, belonged to those hardy
mortals who have proved that old age of itself does not destroy the
creative powers of the mind and body.
• He had grown old in his thought life
A few years ago I called on an old friend in London, Eng-land. He
was over 80 years of age, very ill, and obviously was yielding to his
advancing years. Our conversation revealed his physical weakness, his
210
sense of frustration, and a general deterioration almost approaching
lifelessness. His cry was that he was useless and that no one wanted
him. With an expression of hopelessness he betrayed his false
philosophy, “We are born, grow up, become old, good for nothing,
and that’s the end.”
This mental attitude of futility and worthlessness was the chief
reason for his sickness. He was looking forward only to senescence,
and after that—nothing. Indeed, he had grown old in his thought life,
and his subconscious mind brought about all the evidence of his
habitual thinking.
• Age is the dawn of wisdom
Unfortunately, many people have the same attitude as this unhappy
man. They are afraid of what they term “old age,” the end, and
extinction, which really means that they are afraid of life. Yet, life is
endless. Age is not the flight of years, but the dawn of wisdom.
Wisdom is an awareness of the tremendous spiritual powers in your
subconscious mind and the knowledge of how to apply these powers
to lead a full and happy life. Get it out of your head once and for all
that 65, 75, or 85 years of age is synonymous with the end for you or
anybody else. It can be the beginning of a glorious, fruitful, active,
and most productive life pattern, better than you have ever
experienced. Believe this, expect it, and your subconscious will bring
it to pass.
• Welcome the change
Old age is not a tragic occurrence. What we call the aging process is
really change. It is to be welcomed joyfully and gladly as each phase
of human life is a step forward on the path, which has no end. Man
has powers, which transcend his bodily powers. He has senses, which
transcend his five physical senses.
Scientists today are finding positive indisputable evidence that
something conscious in man can leave his present body and travel
211
thousands of miles to see, hear, touch, and speak to peo-ple even
though his physical body never leaves the couch on which it reclines.
Man’s life is spiritual and eternal. He need never grow old for Life,
or God, cannot grow old. The Bible says that God is Life. Life is selfrenewing, eternal, indestructible, and is the reality of all men.
• Evidence for survival
The evidence gathered by the psychical research societies both in
Great Britain and America is overwhelming. You may go into any
large metropolitan library and get volumes on The Proceedings of the
Psychical Research Society based on findings of distinguished
scientists on survival following so-called death. You will find a
startling report on scientific experiments es-tablishing the reality of
life after death in The Case for Psychic Survival by Hereward
Carrington, Directorof the American Psychical Institute.
• Life is
A woman asked Thomas Edison, the electrical wizard, “Mr. Edison,
what is electricity?”
He replied, “Madame, electricity is. Use it.”
Electricity is a name we give an invisible power which we do not
fully comprehend, but we learn all we can about the principle of
electricity and its uses. We use it in countless ways.
The scientist cannot see an electron with his eyes, yet he accepts it
as a scientific fact, because it is the only valid con-clusion, which
coincides with his other experimental evidence. We cannot see life.
However, we know we are alive. Life is, and we are here to express it
in all its beauty and glory.
• Mind and spirit do not grow old
The Bible says, and this is life eternal, that they might know thee the
only true God. JOHN 17:3.
212
The man who thinks or believes that the earthly cycle of birth,
adolescence, youth, maturity, and old age is all there is to life, is
indeed to be pitied. Such a man has no anchor, no hope, no vision, and
to him life has no meaning.
This type of belief brings frustration, stagnation, cynicism, and a
sense of hopelessness resulting in neurosis and mental aber-rations of
all kinds. If you cannot play a fast game of tennis, or swim as fast as
your son, or if your body has slowed down, or you walk with a slow
step, remember life is always clothing itself anew. What men call
death is but a journey to a new city in another dimension of Life.
I say to men and women in my lectures that they should accept what
we call old age gracefully. Age has its’ own glory, beauty, and
wisdom, which belong to it. Peace, love, joy, beauty, happiness,
wisdom, good will, and understanding are qualities, which never grow
old or die.
Ralph Waldo Emerson, poet and philosopher, said, “We do not
count a man’s years until he has nothing else to count.”
Your character, the quality of your mind, your faith, and your
convictions are not subject to decay.
• You are as young as you think you are
I give public lectures in Caxton Hall, London, England, every few
years, and following one of these lectures, a surgeon said to me, “I am
84 years of age. I operate every morning, visit patients in the
afternoons, and I write for medical and other scientific journals in the
evening.”
His attitude was that he was as useful as he believed him-self to be,
and that he was as young as his thoughts. He said to me, “It’s true
what you said, ‘Man is as strong as he thinks he is, and as valuable as
he thinks he is.’”
This surgeon has not surrendered to advancing years. He knows that
he is immortal. His final comment to me was, “If I should pass on
213
tomorrow, I would be operating on people in the next dimension, not
with a surgeon’s scalpel, but with mental and spiritual surgery.”
• Your gray hairs are an asset
Don’t ever quit a job and say, “I am retired; I am old; I am
finished.” That would be stagnation, death, and you would be finished.
Some men are old at 30, while others are young at 80. The mind is the
master weaver, the architect, the designer, and the sculptor. George
Bernard Shaw was active at 90, and the artistic quality of his mind had
not relaxed from active duty.
I meet men and women who tell me that some employers almost
slam the door in their faces when they say they are over 40. This
attitude on the part of the employers is to be considered cold, callous,
evil, and completely void of compas-sion and understanding. The total
emphasis seems to be on youth, i.e., you must be under 35 years of
age to receive con-sideration. The reasoning behind this is certainly
very shallow. If the employer would stop and think, he would realize
that the man or woman was not selling his age or gray hair, rather, he
was willing to give of his talents, his experience, and his wis-dom
gathered through years of experience in the market place of life.
• Age is an asset
Your age should be a distinct asset to any organization, because of
your practice and application through the years of the principles of the
Golden Rule and the law of love and good will. Your gray hair, if you
have any, should stand for greater wisdom, skill, and understanding.
Your emotional and spiritual maturity should be a tremendous
blessing to any organization.
A man should not be asked to resign when he is 65 years of age.
That is the time of life when he could be most useful in handling
personnel problems, making plans for the future, making decisions,
and guiding others in the realm of creative ideas based on his
experience and insight into the nature of the business.
214
• Be your age
A motion-picture writer in Hollywood told me that he had to write
scripts, which would cater to the twelve-year-old mind.
This is a tragic state of affairs if the great masses of people are
expected to become emotionally and spiritually mature. It means that
the emphasis is placed on youth in spite of the fact that youth stands
for inexperience, lack of discernment, and hasty judgment.
• I can keep up with the best of them
I am now thinking of a man 65 years of age who is trying frantically
to keep young. He swims with young men every Sun-day, goes on
long hikes, plays tennis, and boasts of his prowess and physical
powers, saying, “Look, I can keep up with the best of them!”
He should remember the great truth: As a man thinketh in his heart,
so is he. PROV. 23:7.
Diets, exercises, and games of all kinds will not keep this man
young. It is necessary for him to observe that he grows old or remains
young in accordance with his processes of think-ing. Your
subconscious mind is conditioned by your thoughts. If your thoughts
are constantly on the beautiful, the noble, and the good, you will
remain young regardless of the chronological years.
• Fear of old age
Job said, The thing which I greatly feared is come upon me. There
are many people who fear old age and are uncertain about the future,
because they anticipate mental and physical deterioration as the years
advance. What they think and feel comes to pass.
You grow old when you lose interest in life, when you cease to
dream, to hunger after new truths, and to search for new worlds to
conquer. When your mind is open to new ideas, new interests, and
when you raise the curtain and let in the sunshine and inspiration of
new truths of life and the universe, you will be young and vital.
215
• You Lave much to give
If you are 65 or 95 years of age, realize you have much to give. You
can help stabilize, advise, and direct the younger generation. You can
give the benefit of your knowledge, your experience, and your
wisdom. You can always look ahead for at all times you are gazing
into infinite life. You will find that you can never cease to unveil the
glories and wonders of life. Try to learn something new every moment
of the day, and you will find your mind will always be young.
• One hundred and ten years old
Some years ago while lecturing in Bombay, India, I was introduced
to a man who said he was 110 years old. He had the most beautiful
face I have ever seen. He seemed trans-figured by the radiance of an
inner light. There was a rare beauty in his eyes indicating he had
grown old in years with gladness and with no indication that his mind
had dimmed its lights.
• Retirement is a new venture
Be sure that your mind never retires. It must be like a parachute,
which is no good unless it opens up. Be open and receptive to new
ideas. I have seen men of 65 and 70 retire. They seemed to rot away,
and in a few months passed on. They obviously felt that life was at an
end.
Retirement can be a new venture, a new challenge, a new path, the
beginning of the fulfillment of a long dream. It is inexpressibly
depressing to hear a man say, “What shall I do now that I am retired?”
He is saying in effect, “I am mentally and physically dead. My mind is
bankrupt of ideas.”
All this is a false picture. The real truth is that you can accomplish
more at 90 than you did at 60, because each day you are growing in
wisdom and understanding of life and the universe through your new
studies and interest.
216
• He graduated to a better job
An executive, who lives near me, was forced to retire a few months
ago because he had reached the age of 65. He said to me, “I look upon
my retirement as promotion from kinder-garten to the first grade.” He
philosophized in this manner: He said that when he left high school,
he went up the ladder by going to college. He realized this was a step
forward in his education and understanding of life in general.
Likewise, he added, now he could do the things he had always wanted
to do, and therefore, his retirement was still another step forward on
the ladder of life and wisdom.
He came to the wise conclusion that he was no longer going to
concentrate on making a living. Now he was going to give all his
attention to living life. He is an amateur photog-rapher, and he took
additional courses on the subject. He took a trip around the world and
took movies of famous places. He now lectures before various groups,
lodges, and clubs, and is in popular demand.
There are countless ways of taking an interest in some-thing
worthwhile outside yourself. Become enthusiastic over new creative
ideas, make spiritual progress, and continue to learn and to grow. In
this manner you remain young in heart, because you are hungering
and thirsting after new truths, and your body will reflect your thinking
at all times.
• You must be a producer and not a prisoner of society
The newspapers are taking cognizance of the fact that the voting
population of the elderly in California elections is increas-ing by leaps
and bounds. This means that their voices will be heard in the
legislature of the state and also in the halls of Con-gress. I believe
there will be enacted a federal law prohibiting employers from
discrimination against men and women because of age.
A man of 65 years may be younger mentally, physically, and
physiologically than many men at 30. It is stupid and ridicu-lous to
tell a man he cannot be hired because he is over 40. It is like saying to
him that he is ready for the scrap heap or the junk pile.
217
What is a man of 40 or over to do? Must he bury his talents and hide
his light under a bushel? Men, who are deprived and prevented from
working because of age must be sustained by government treasuries at
county, state, and federal levels. The many organizations who refuse
to hire them and benefit from their wisdom and experience will be
taxed to support them. This is a form of financial suicide.
Man is here to enjoy the fruit of his labor, and he is here to be a
producer and not a prisoner of society, which compels him to idleness.
Man’s body slows down gradually as he advances through the years,
but his conscious mind can be made much more active, alert, alive,
and quickened by the inspiration from his subconscious mind. His
mind, in reality, never grows old. Job said, Oh that I were as in
months past, as in the days when God preserved me; When his candle
shined upon my head, and when by his light I walked through
darkness; As I was in the days of my youth, when the secret of God
was upon my tabernacle. JOB 29:2-4.
• Secret of youth
To recapture the days of your youth, feel the miraculous, healing,
selfrenewing power of your subconscious mind moving through your
whole being. Know and feel that you are inspired, lifted up,
rejuvenated, revitalized, and recharged spiritually. You can bubble
over with enthusiasm and joy, as in the days of your youth, for the
simple reason that you can always men-tally and emotionally
recapture the joyous state.
The candle, which shines upon your head, is divine intelligence, and
reveals to you everything you need to know; it enables you to affirm
the presence of your good, regardless of appearances. You walk by the
guidance of your subconscious mind, because you know that the dawn
appears and the shadows flee away.
• Get a vision
Instead of saying, “I am old,” say, “I am wise in the way of the
Divine Life.” Don’t let the corporation, newspapers, or statistics hold
a picture before you of old age, declining years, decrepitude, senility,
218
and uselessness. Reject it, for it is a lie. Refuse to be hypnotized by
such propaganda. Affirm life—not death. Get a vision of yourself as
happy, radiant, successful, serene, and powerful.
• Your mind does not grow old
Former President Herbert Hoover, now 88 years old, is very active
and is performing monumental work. I interviewed him a few years
ago in his suite at the Waldorf-Astoria, New York City. I found him
healthy, happy, vigorous, and full of life and enthusiasm. He was
keeping several secretaries busy handling his correspondence and was
himself writing books of a political and historical nature. Like all great
men, I found him affable, genial, amiable, loving, and most
understanding.
His mental acumen and sagacity gave me the thrill of a lifetime. He
is a deeply religious man, and is full of faith in God and in the triumph
of the eternal truth of life. He was subjected to a barrage of criticism
and condemnation in the years of the great depression, but he
weathered the storm and did not grow old in hatred, resentment, ill
will, and bitterness. On the con-trary, he went into the silence of his
soul, and communing with the Divine Presence within him, he found
the peace, which is the power at the heart of God.
• His mind active at ninety-nine
My father learned the French language at 65 years of age, and
became an authority on it at 70. He made a study of Gaelic when he
was over 60, and became an acknowledged and famous teacher of the
subject. He assisted my sister in a school of higher learning and
continued to do so until he passed away at 99. His mind was as clear
at 99 as it was when he was 20. Moreover, his handwriting and his
reasoning powers had improved with age. Truly, you are as old as you
think and feel.
• We need our senior citizens
Marcus Porcius Cato, the Roman patriot, learned Greek at 80.
Madame Ernestine Schumann-Heink, the great German-American
219
contralto, reached the pinnacle of her musical suc-cess after she
became a grandmother. It is wonderful to behold the accomplishments
of the oldsters. General Douglas Mac-Arthur, Harry S. Truman,
General Dwight David Eisenhower, and American financier Bernard
Baruch are interesting, active, and contributing their talents and
wisdom to the world.
The Greek philosopher Socrates, learned to play musical
instruments when he was 80 years old. Michelangelo was paint-ing his
greatest canvases at 80. At 80, Cios Simonides won the prize for
poetry, Johann von Goethe finished Faust, and Leopold von Ranke
commenced his History of the World, which he fin-ished at 92.
Alfred Tennyson wrote a magnificent poem, “Crossing the Bar,” at
83.
Isaac Newton was hard at work close to 85. At 88 John Wesley was
directing, preaching, and guiding Meth-odism. We have several men
of 95 years who come to my lec-tures, and they tell me they are in
better health now than they were at 20.
Let us place our senior citizens in high places and give them every
opportunity to bring forth the flowers of Paradise.
If you are retired, get interested in the laws of life and the wonders
of your subconscious mind. Do something you have always wanted to
do. Study new subjects, and investigate new ideas.
Pray as follows: As the hart panteth after the water brooks, so
panteth my soul after thee, O God. PSALM 42:1.
• The fruits of old age
His flesh shall be fresher than a child¶s: he shall return to the days
of his youth. JOB 33:25.
Old age really means the contemplation of the truths of God from
the highest standpoint. Realize that you are on an endless journey, a
series of important steps in the ceaseless, tire-less, endless ocean of
220
life. Then, with the Psalmist you will say, They shall still bring forth
fruit in old age; they shall be fat and flourishing. PSALM 92:14.
But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, patience, gentleness,
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: against such there is no law.
GALATIANS 5:22-23.
You are a son of Infinite Life, which knows no end, and you are a
child of Eternity.
• Profitable pointers
1. Patience, kindness, love, good will, joy, happiness, wisdom, and
understanding are qualities, which never grow old. Cul-tivate them
and express them, and remain young in mind and body.
2. Some research physicians say that the neurotic fear of the effects
of time may well be the cause of premature aging.
3. Age is not the flight of years; it is the dawn of wisdom in the
mind of man.
4. The most productive years of your life can be from 65 to 95.
5. Welcome the advancing years. It means you are moving higher on
the path of life, which has no end.
6. God is Life, and that is your life now. Life is self-renewing,
eternal, and indestructible, and is the reality of all men. You live
forever, because your life is God’s life.
7. Evidence of survival after death is overwhelming. Study
Proceedings of Psychical Research Society of Great Britain and
America in your library. Outstanding scientists base the work on the
scientific research for over 75 years.
8. You cannot see your mind, but you know you have a mind. You
cannot see spirit, but you know that the spirit of the game, the spirit of
the artist, the spirit of the musician, and the spirit of the speaker is
real. Likewise, the spirit of good-ness, truth, and beauty moving in
221
your mind and heart are real. You cannot see life, but you know you
are alive.
9. Old age may be called the contemplation of the truths of God
from the highest standpoint. The joys of old age are greater than those
of youth. Your mind is engaged in spiritual and mental athletics.
Nature slows down your body so that you may have the opportunity to
meditate on things divine.
10. We do not count a man’s years until he has nothing else to
count. Your faith and convictions are not subject to decay.
11. You are as young as you think you are. You are as strong as you
think you are. You are as useful as you think you are. You are as
young as your thoughts.
12. Your gray hair is an asset. You are not selling your gray hairs.
You are selling your talent, abilities, and wisdom, which you have
garnered through the years.
13. Diets- and exercises won’t keep you young. As a man thinketh,
so is he.
14. Fear of old age can bring about physical and mental deterioration. The thing I greatly feared has come upon me.
15. You grow old when you cease to dream, and when you lose
interest in life. You grow old if you are irritable, crotchety, petulant,
and cantankerous. Fill your mind with the truths of God and radiate
the sunshine of His love—this is youth.
16. Look ahead, for at all times you are gazing into infinite life.
17. Your retirement is a new venture. Take up new studies and new
interests. You can now do the things you always wanted to do when
you were so busy making a living. Give your attention to living life.
18. Become a producer and not a prisoner of society. Don’t hide
your light under a bushel.
222
19. The secret of youth is love, joy, inner peace, and laughter. In
Him there is fullness of joy. In Him there is no darkness at all.
20. You are needed. Some of the great philosophers, artists,
scientists, writers, and others accomplished their greatest work after
they were 80 years old.
21. The fruits of old age are love, joy, peace, patience, gentle-ness,
goodness, faith, meekness, and temperance.
22. You are a son of Infinite Life, which knows no end. You are a
child of Eternity. You are wonderful!
The end
I hope you have enjoyed this wonderful audio book. If you take the
lessons found in this book to heart and incorporate them into your life,
You will be able to create the life you have always dreamed of. For
more of the world’s greatest success tools please see our website at
www.livethepower.com and remember you have the power within
you…. Live the Power!
